© 2010 International Monetary Fund

September 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/278

January 8, 2009
January 28, 2009 xxxJanuary 29, 2001
xxxJanuary 29, 2001
January 28, 2009
Turkey: Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring—
Supplementary Information; Staff Report; Informational Annex; and Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
The following documents have been released and are included in this package:


A Supplementary Information of July 27, 2010.



The staff report, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
May 26, 2010, with the officials of Turkey on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
July 13, 2010. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



An Informational Annex of July 13, 2010.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 30, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
TURKEY
Staff Report for the Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring—
Supplementary Information
Prepared by the European Department
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by Ajai Chopra and Aasim Husain
July 27, 2010

1.
This supplement updates economic performance and policy developments that
occurred since the staff report was issued. The thrust of the staff appraisal is not affected.
However, with the delay in legislating the fiscal rule, a crucial anchor for fiscal policy and
expectations is missing, and staff’s updated appraisal in this regard is provided in
paragraph 5.
Macroeconomic developments
2.
Recent high-frequency indicators are broadly consistent with staff’s current
macroeconomic forecasts. Consumer and commercial loans have maintained their rapid
pace and continue to spur domestic demand, while unemployment declined further in
seasonally-adjusted terms. Despite the recent drop in headline inflation, medium-term
inflation expectations have moderated only slightly.
3.
Recent fiscal developments suggest revenue overperformance is being partially
offset by increases in discretionary spending. Robust activity continues to underpin strong
revenue collection relative to the 2009 Medium-Term Plan (MTP) and 2010 budget,
consistent with staff’s projections. However, on year-to-date trends, discretionary spending
looks set to exceed full-year budget appropriations. Therefore, while developments are in line
with the 2010 deficit target of 0.3 percent of GDP, they diverge from staff’s recommendation
to save revenue overperformance in excess of mandatory spending increases (due to higher
inflation and revenue sharing) so as to limit pressure on the current account.
Policy developments
4.
In a significant policy shift, the government recently announced it has no specific
schedule for bringing the fiscal rule legislation before parliament, and intends instead
to continue to follow the September 2009 MTP. Contrary to previous indications,

2
parliament’s general assembly did not consider the fiscal rule legislation—which has
garnered broad political support—during its recently concluded session.1 Finance Minister
Simsek stated on July 15 the government would determine at a later date the timing of
parliamentary consideration and the 2011 budget would be drawn up according to the current
three-year MTP. In presenting the just-released July inflation report, Governor Yilmaz
explained that gradual, modest policy rate increases would be delayed till 2011 owing to
moderating price pressures, but that this strategy would be reconsidered if the government
failed to adopt the fiscal rule for the 2011 budget cycle.
5.
Staff considers that the fiscal rule is considerably superior to the 2009 MTP and
urges passage of the draft rule without further delay. Under staff’s baseline macro
scenario but assuming little revenue overperformance is saved this year, the fiscal target in
2011 set by the rule would be broadly similar to the MTP.2 However, the rule is motivated by
longer-term considerations. Specifically, the rule is an explicit binding commitment to a
prudent, countercyclical policy. This contrasts with the short-term MTP targets, which are ad
hoc and do not automatically adjust to changing cyclical conditions.3 Moreover, if passed in
its current form, the rule would introduce needed enhancements to transparency and public
financial management procedures. Finally, although markets have so far taken the
postponement in stride, failure to pass the rule quickly may forfeit the window of opportunity
that could close ahead of the approaching election cycle, and risk weakening the credibility
of the authorities’ commitment to fiscal discipline.

1

The draft law was approved by Parliament’s budget committee in June.

2

By contrast, if, as staff recommends, 2010 revenue overperformance is saved, the 2011 primary balance target
under the rule would be about 0.7 percent of GDP, against 0.4 percent of GDP in the MTP.

3

Recent experience illustrates how quickly the MTP targets can become outdated: the 2009 deficit target (set in
the May 2008 MTP) was unachievable and too restrictive because of the deep recession, while the 2010 target
(set in the September 2009 MTP) is now insufficiently ambitious due to the much stronger-than-expected
growth recovery.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
TURKEY
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with Turkey
Approved by Ajai Chopra and Aasim Husain
July 13, 2010
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Past surveillance: During the 2007 Article IV consultation, Directors praised Turkey’s progress
with reducing imbalances inherited from the 2001 crisis, and urged further efforts to lower public
debt and inflation. To achieve this, the authorities maintained a tight monetary stance and high fiscal
primary surpluses, but these deteriorated on a cyclically-adjusted basis. As recommended by
Directors, a fiscal rule will soon be introduced. However, more effort is needed to remove
impediments to employment creation and labor productivity. The authorities have increased
gradually the level of international reserves, as supported by Directors.
Context: Earlier strong reforms and solid macro policies supported resilient bank and household
balance sheets and made room for decisive policy easing during the crisis. A domestic demand-led
rebound is now underway, underpinned by credit growth, and bringing a surging current account
deficit and higher inflation, while unemployment remains elevated.
Challenges: Growth is biased toward imports and reliant on foreign saving, reflecting the existence
of a competitiveness gap. With low reserve cover and deteriorating quality of external financing,
output volatility could increase amid the more unsettled global situation. Persistent inflation
differentials could further widen the current account deficit.
Policies and staff views: Rebalancing growth requires domestic demand restraint and decisive
structural reforms to lower import dependence. Needed policies include: (i) saving fiscal revenue
performance in 2010; (ii) implementing the new fiscal rule from 2011 underpinned by durable fiscal
savings; (iii) gradual and modest broad-based monetary tightening while raising daily FX purchases
to build reserves; (iv) quickly phasing out financial sector forbearance measures and tightening
prudential regulations; and (v) aligning productivity-adjusted employment costs with those of
regional peers and strictly adhering to the energy pricing formula. If the recovery stalls,
recommendations on fiscal and structural policies remain appropriate, while monetary tightening
should be halted or possibly reversed.
Authorities’ views: The widening current account deficit reflects structural factors less related to
relative prices. While recovery will likely be stronger than originally envisaged in the 2010 budget,
external developments are a risk. Therefore, a measured fiscal exit is appropriate, underpinned by a
new deficit-based fiscal rule from 2011. Liquidity conditions will be slowly normalized and
monetary policy gradually tightened as warranted by domestic and external factors. Relaxed
financial sector regulations are still required to encourage rollover of existing loans, and possible
risks from banking sector concentration should be addressed. Sustained rapid GDP growth and better
training are key to lowering unemployment.

2

Contents

Page

Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. 1
I. Context ................................................................................................................................... 3
A. The Growth Surge (2002–07) ........................................................................................ 3
B. Crisis and Recovery (2008–mid 2010) ........................................................................... 6
C. Policy Responses .......................................................................................................... 13
D. Political Setting ............................................................................................................ 16
II. Report on the Discussions .................................................................................................. 17
A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks ............................................................................. 17
B. Current Account Deficit, Competitiveness, and External Stability.............................. 17
C. Policies ......................................................................................................................... 21
III. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................. 28
Boxes
1. Turkey’s Net Financial Asset Position by Sector, 2003–09 ............................................... 4
2. Composition of GDP During the Crisis—This Time IS Different ...................................... 7
3. Impact of Recent Regulatory Changes on FX Loans ........................................................ 11
4. External Competitiveness ................................................................................................. 19
5. Near-Term Implications of the Fiscal Rule....................................................................... 24
Figures
1. Pre-Crisis Vulnerabilities, 2007 ........................................................................................ 31
2. Real Sector Developments, 2006–10 ................................................................................ 32
3. Inflation Developments, 2006–10 ..................................................................................... 33
4. External Sector Developments, 2006–10 .......................................................................... 34
5. Banking System, 2006–10 ................................................................................................ 35
6. Financial Indicators, 2007–10 ........................................................................................... 36
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2005–11 ........................................................................... 37
2. Balance of Payments, 2007–15 ......................................................................................... 38
3. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2007–15................................................. 40
4. Consolidated Fiscal Presentation, 2005–11 ...................................................................... 41
5. Public Sector Finances, 2005–11 ...................................................................................... 42
6. Medium-Term Scenario, 2003–15 .................................................................................... 44
7. Banking System at a Glance, 2007–10 ............................................................................. 45
Appendices
I.
Debt Sustainability Analysis and Capacity to Repay the Fund...................................... 46
II. Spillover Channels from Problems in the Euro Area ..................................................... 52
III. Turkey’s New Fiscal Rule.............................................................................................. 61
IV. Current Status of Main Recommendations from the 2007 FSAP .................................. 67

3
I. CONTEXT
A. The Growth Surge (2002–07)
1.
On the eve of the global financial crisis, the Turkish economy had just concluded
a six-year growth surge, spurred by policy reforms and favorable external and domestic
conditions. Greater political stability, policy reforms in the context of Fund-supported
programs (including overhaul of financial sector supervision, introduction of inflation
targeting, and conservative fiscal targets), and initiation of EU accession negotiations
improved confidence in economic management and strengthened fundamentals. Together
with strong world growth and bounce back from the 2001 crisis, these factors propelled GDP
growth to 6¾ percent on average during 2002–07. The combination of rapid growth and
sound macro policies produced large fiscal primary surpluses, rapid retreat of public debt,
moderate inflation, and strong bank and household balance sheets (Box 1).

4
Box 1. Turkey’s Net Financial Asset Position by Sector, 2003–09
As a share of GDP, Turkey’s net financial asset (NFA) position improved during 2003-2007 by
11 percent of GDP as the reduction in public sector (government and central bank) net indebtedness
(by some 26 percentage points) more than offset increased leverage by households (10 percentage
points) and nonfinancial firms (5 percentage points). Both the public sector and firms have a net
financial liability position, while households and banks have a positive position, but with a net
liability position for the economy overall (8 percent of GDP).
The global financial crisis interrupted the
improvement in aggregate NFA in 2008,
largely reflecting the valuation increase in
firms’ liabilities from depreciation of the lira.
Aggregate NFA resumed improving
in 2009—despite a deterioration in the public
sector position from the widening fiscal
deficit—mainly due to increased household
saving, repayment of FX loans by firms,
appreciation of the lira, and strong bank
profits. For both households and firms,
deposit accumulation exceeded new
borrowing.

2.
Improved growth prospects, amid abundant global liquidity, attracted strong
capital inflows that fueled the economic
expansion but also widened the current
account deficit. Capital inflows—direct private
external borrowing, FDI, and portfolio flows—
spurred private investment which, in turn,
supported rapid GDP growth. Alongside a
cumulative 40 percent appreciation of the CPIbased real exchange rate from 2002 to 2007,
imports consistently grew faster than exports, and
the current account deficit widened from balance
in 2002 to a deficit of 5¾ percent of GDP
in 2007.

5

3.
Nonetheless, the unemployment rate remained stuck around 10 percent, with a
high share of unofficial or semi-official employment. This may reflect significant
inefficiencies in the formal sector labor market, including a minimum wage that was
increased substantially (tripling in U.S. dollar terms since 2002), is now higher than in almost
all new EU member countries, and is binding
in lower-income regions of Turkey. Also,
Turkey’s severance pay scheme is among the
most generous in the OECD (one month per
year of tenure), while its regulations on shortterm contracts are the most restrictive. As a
result, jobs have been squeezed from the
formal to the informal sector (wages reported
to the Social Security Institution are less
than 20 percent of GDP and more than
40 percent of private-sector wage earners
report only the minimum wage—also
representing a significant tax leakage), or job creation has been discouraged altogether.

6

4.
While the growth surge created some new vulnerabilities, Turkey entered the
global crisis in a stronger position than many other countries in emerging Europe.
Standard indicators suggest Turkey’s fundamentals were not as strong as those typical in
emerging Asia and Latin America, but vulnerabilities (particularly the current account
deficit, external debt, and the cyclically-adjusted primary fiscal deficit) were generally well
below levels present in emerging Europe (Figure 1). This reflects the more restrained size of
the foreign credit-induced boom, better focus of macro policies on leaning against the
cyclical upswing, and the more restrictive regulatory environment for credit.
B. Crisis and Recovery (2008–mid 2010)
5.
Turkish GDP was hit hard by the onset of the global financial crisis, but quickly
retraced its losses (Figure 2). Capital flight,
seizing up of bank lending, and collapse of
external demand—together with a history of
output volatility that was compounded by
domestic political turbulence in mid-2008—
caused domestic confidence to quickly erode.
As a result, investment, including inventories,
dropped sharply, with a smaller decline in
exports (Box 2). Seasonally adjusted output
plummeted 12 percent during Q4 2008 and
Q1 2009. However, domestic demand revived
strongly beginning in Q2 2009 on improving
global sentiment and the consequent reflow of
capital, combined with an effective domestic
policy response (temporary cuts in
consumption taxes and relaxed monetary
policy). More recently, inventory restocking

7
abroad has buoyed Turkish exports. The steep recovery cushioned the GDP decline to
4¾ percent for 2009 as a whole and led to a 11¾ percent year-on-year rise in output during
the first quarter of 2010.

Box 2. Composition of GDP During the Crisis—This Time IS Different
A comparison of Turkey’s GDP collapse during the 2009 global crisis and Turkey’s 2001
financial crisis indicates that, while the overall
GDP decline was of a similar magnitude, the
underlying expenditure composition was quite
different. The global nature of the current crisis
made exports much less supportive in 2009
than in 2001, when export growth was even
positive. Inventory drawdown was also much
deeper in 2009 than in 2001, as the widespread
nature and expected long duration of the
current crisis at its onset caused firms to run
down inventories. Consequently, with the
global recovery occurring sooner and stronger
than initially anticipated, inventory restocking
has been an important driver of growth since Q2 2009.

8
6.
The output gap—while still
negative—is closing, and underlying
inflation pressures appear contained.
Capacity utilization picked up in tandem
with the very strong rebound in industrial
production. Seasonally adjusted
unemployment moderated from a peak of
15 percent in early 2009 to 12½ percent in
March 2010. With the negative output gap
currently around 1-2 percent, headline and
core inflation recently resumed their
downward path after being pushed up
temporarily in early 2010 on large excise
hikes and food price shocks (Figure 3).
Inflation expectations are also moderating, but remain near the top of the Central Bank of
Turkey’s (CBT’s) uncertainty band around the point target for 2010 and 2011.1

7.
The current account deficit slumped during the crisis on weak demand, but has
recently picked up sharply (Figure 4). After more than halving to 2¼ percent of GDP
in 2009, the current account deficit rebounded strongly since late in the year on surging
imports, while exports are growing at a slower pace. Reflecting Turkey’s dependence on
1

The inflation targets for 2009 and 2010 were revised up in mid-2008 from 4 percent to 7.5 and 6.5 percent,
respectively, on the expectation of persistent high global food and energy price inflation. The inflation target for
2011 has been set at 5.5 percent.

9
imported energy and high energy intensity of GDP relative to the EU (likely attributable to
relatively low end-user electricity and gas prices), the energy trade deficit has been stable at
around 4-5 percent of GDP, in contrast to non-energy imports, which are highly cyclical.

8.
The banking sector displayed considerable resilience to the crisis, helped by a
supportive policy environment (Figure 5). Strong capitalization, minimal FX exposure,
primarily deposit-based funding, and adequate liquidity allowed banks to weather the
financial and output shocks. Policy responses to the crisis—cuts in policy interest rates and
relaxation of regulations on loan classification and provisioning (see below)—helped boost
profits and capital ratios through wider interest margins, dampened NPLs (which rose from
3.8 percent of total loans at end-2008 to 5.6 percent of total loans at end-2009),2 and a shift in
assets to zero-risk-weighted government bonds (on expectations of future declines in the
2

According to the BRSA, although not expected, if all restructured loans were to become non-performing, the
NPL ratio would rise to 7.6 percent.

10
policy rate). As a result, Turkish banks’ profits rose 50 percent in 2009, and the average CAR
increased to in excess of 20 percent (the two lowest individual bank CARs were 13 and
15 percent). The authorities’ stress tests indicate the banking system’s CAR would remain
above the 12 percent regulatory minimum under severe credit, currency, or interest rate
shocks.
9.
Although capital inflows have resumed, their quality has deteriorated since the
onset of the crisis. Since late 2008, the composition of external financing shifted from FDI
and longer-term debt to shorter-duration and one-off inflows (errors and omissions in the
BoP include drawdown of deposits held abroad by nonbanks and repatriations from a tax
amnesty). Reflecting in part lower credit demand, corporates’ external indebtedness declined.
Turkish financial indicators (nominal exchange rate, equities, CDS spreads) recovered
strongly since the start of the emerging market rally in March 2009 (Figure 6).3 Debt rollover
rates on borrowing by banks and corporates have more recently picked up (after correcting
for changes in FX lending regulations—Box 3), albeit from depressed levels. With capital
inflows having recovered, in August 2009 the CBT resumed daily FX purchase auctions—
about US$10 billion to date—halted at the onset of the crisis, in order to continue to build
reserves (currently at 82 percent of short-term external debt).

3

Movements in the lira were also cushioned by households’ profit-taking on deposits, whereby deposits were
converted from lira into FX (FX into lira) when the lira strengthened (weakened).

11
Box 3. Impact of Recent Regulatory Changes on FX Loans
Two recent regulatory measures (lifting the ban on onshore FX lending to unhedged corporates,
and imposing reserve requirements on syndicated and securitized debt contracted by offshore
branches) triggered changes in the size and composition of capital inflows that distort the time
series on external debt rollovers and credit growth.
Allowing onshore lending in FX to unhedged firms: The June 16, 2009 amendment permits
onshore lending in FX to Turkish firms with no FX income, provided the loan is for at least 1
year and for a minimum of
US$5 million, or without any condition
on maturity or amount if adequately
collateralized by FX deposits in a
domestic bank branch or FXdenominated bonds issued or guaranteed
by an OECD country government
or central bank. Previously, domestic
unhedged corporates were not permitted
to borrow FX onshore and, to evade this
restriction, Turkish banks lent in FX
through their offshore branches or issued
FX-indexed loans onshore. (As before,
households are not permitted to borrow
in FX and, with the amendment, are no
longer permitted to take out FX-indexed loans.) Following the amendment, which aimed to
increase transparency, FX credit is gradually shifting from offshore branches to banks’ onshore
headquarters (HQ) operations, with the onshore migration expected to proceed in line with the
maturity structure of existing offshore loans.
Imposing reserve requirements on debt contracted by offshore branches: From the beginning
of 2010, all new syndicated and securitized loans contracted by offshore branches are subject to
reserve requirements, thereby equalizing treatment with debt contracted by HQ and reducing the
incentive for direct foreign borrowing by offshore branches.
As a result of these regulatory changes, the activities of offshore branches will be reduced, but
with little impact on the consolidated (on- and offshore) banking sector. Nonetheless, this will
create sizable temporary and permanent effects on rollover rates on foreign loans, external debt,
and credit growth:

12
Box 3. Impact of Recent Regulatory Changes on FX Loans (continued)


Corporates’ external borrowing will
decline permanently relative to the
counterfactual of unchanged
regulations (previously, more than a
third of corporates’ external credit
stock reflected loans from offshore
branches). Gradual migration to
onshore loans will temporarily
depress corporate external debt
rollover ratios.



Onshore (corresponding to the
residency concept used in the BoP)
banks’ external borrowing will
permanently increase relative to the
no-policy-change counterfactual as
they issue directly a larger share of
consolidated bank group external debt or—in the event offshore branches continue to issue
syndicated loans—receive funds from their offshore branches. During the transition,
inflows to HQ banks will increase as offshore branches transfer resources through deposit
inflows (drawdown of banks’ foreign
assets abroad) and/or more syndicated
loans are contracted by HQ banks
(increasing banks’ loan rollover ratio,
and mirroring the temporary decline
in corporate rollovers).



Onshore credit growth will
temporarily exceed credit growth by
the consolidated banking sector,
reflecting the shift in origination of
FX loans.



The composition of external debt will
shift from corporates to banks. The
level of gross external debt may also
decline to the extent that, prior to the regulatory changes, HQ borrowed abroad directly and
onlent to foreign branches to fund loans to corporates (creating two foreign borrowing
entries in the BoP—one by the HQ bank and the other by the corporate, in addition to an
asset outflow corresponding to the buildup of deposits abroad by the HQ bank). With the
migration to onshore FX lending, in most cases, only the HQ bank will borrow abroad.

13
C. Policy Responses
10.
The authorities’ macroeconomic policy response to the severe GDP contraction
was broadly appropriate in timing and magnitude and made feasible by the previously
conservative stance of policies.
Fiscal policy
11.
Cyclical factors and a structural loosening weakened the fiscal balance from
mid-2008 to mid-2009. Cyclical revenue loss accounted for the bulk of the deterioration in
the nonfinancial public sector (NFPS) primary balance. However, an across-the-board
discretionary loosening (including a long-planned 5 percentage point cut in social security
premiums, a sizable increase in the real wage bill, and increased investment spending),
unrelated to the downturn, was already underway when the crisis hit in late 2008.
Subsequently, a package of targeted stimulus measures was adopted in early 2009 that
included expanded short-time unemployment benefits and temporary tax cuts on purchases of
cars and other durables, with the latter effective in boosting demand for these products.

12.
As a result, public sector balance sheets
deteriorated. The NFPS primary balance declined
by 4 percentage points during 2007-09 to a deficit
of 1 percent of GDP (although the 2009 outturn
was considerably better than anticipated due in part
to an unexpectedly strong growth recovery). The
debt-to-GDP ratio rose by 6 percentage points to
45 percent (Appendix I). To moderate government
funding costs, the share of floating rate debt was
increased sharply (mostly inflation-linked bonds).

14
As a result, interest rates on about 80 percent of lira debt will reset within 12 months.
13.
Since mid-2009, fiscal policy has focused on exiting from stimulus. The widening
spread between the cost of government borrowing and the policy rate raised concerns the
rapidly growing deficit was weakening confidence and crowding out the nascent private
sector credit recovery. In July 2009, excises on tobacco and petroleum were raised, yielding
about 0.5 percent of GDP on a full-year basis, although it further skewed the tax burden
toward indirect taxes. A Medium-Term Program (MTP), announced in September 2009,
targets gradual fiscal consolidation over the next three years. The 2010 primary deficit target
of 0.3 percent of GDP was supported by a zero real wage increase for civil servants, further
hikes in already-high excises on petroleum and tobacco, increased healthcare copayments,
and reduced payments to drug suppliers. However, an ad hoc increase in low pensions
(costing 0.3 percent of GDP per annum) was granted at the beginning of 2010.
Debt and Deficit Targets in the September 2009 Medium-Term Program
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted)

Nonfinancial public sector primary balance
General government debt (EU defined)
Memorandum items:
Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator growth (percent)

2007

2008

Actual

Actual

2009
September
2009 MTP

2010

Actual

2011

September September
2009 MTP 2009 MTP

3.1
39.4

1.6
39.5

-2.1
47.3

-1.0
45.4

-0.3
49.0

0.4
48.8

4.7
6.2

0.7
12.0

-6.0
6.0

-4.7
5.4

3.5
5.0

4.0
4.5

Sources: Turkish authorites; and IMF staff calculations.

Monetary policy
14.
With the prospect of subdued inflation and a rapidly widening output gap,
monetary policy was eased aggressively,
beginning in November 2008. The policy
rate was cut by a cumulative 10¼ percentage
points (10 percentage points in real terms).
Lira and FX liquidity were expanded
through various operations, including
reductions in reserve requirements and
extension of repo maturities to three months,
making the CBT a large net supplier of
liquidity. Turkey’s real policy rate is now
low given the position in the cycle, even
after adjusting for one-off excise increases.

15

15.
By supporting banks’ balance sheets, monetary loosening facilitated renewed
credit growth once lending standards eased. Cuts in the policy rate were transmitted to
market rates, but at speeds and pass-through rates that varied across instruments. Rates on
corporate lending declined the most, by more than 15 percentage points. However, increased
risk aversion and a drop in credit demand initially constrained new lending. In the interim,
monetary policy relaxation accommodated fiscal expansion by increasing banks’ appetite for
government debt. Widening interest margins (especially on consumer credit), together with
recovering domestic demand and easing lending standards in the second half of 2009, helped
revive credit supply—initially by state banks—which accelerated further to an annualized
rate of around 30 percent in the first 5 months of 2010.

16
Financial sector policies
16.
Amendments to prudential regulations aimed to preserve banks’ high capital
adequacy ratios while encouraging lending. Measures included regulatory approval prior
to payout of bank dividends, a one-time reclassification of banks’ holdings of government
securities to the investment account, temporary easing of conditions for restructuring loans,
and temporary elimination of general provisioning for new loans. The rescission of the ban
on some onshore FX lending to unhedged corporates should, on a consolidated basis, have
minimal effect on banks’ related exposures, whereas the permanent ban on FX-indexed
lending to households should reduce this source of indirect FX exposure (text table and
Box 3).
Main Measures Affecting the Financial Sector Prudential Framework
Measure

Description

Adoption Date

Reclassification of banks' holdings of
government securities

Allowed banks to reclassify on a one-time basis their
available-for-sale securities to hold-to-maturity status
consistent with changes in international accounting
standards, thereby avoiding the need for mark-to-market
pricing and recording capital write-downs when securities
prices fall

October 2008

Dividend policy

Requires banks to seek approval from the BRSA before
distributing dividends

October 2008; extended
again in 2010 for 2009
profits

Reclassification of restructured loans

Allows banks to reclassify loans from “less than 90 days
overdue” to “performing” if (i) the debtor falls behind
because of a “temporary liquidity crunch”; (ii) the loans are
restructured; and (iii) a minimum of 3 installment
payments—amounting to at least 15 percent of the
restructured loan—are subsequently paid; TL 11 billion in
loans (about 3 percent of total loans) were restructured
under this provision through March 2010

January 2009; extended in
March 2010 for another
year

Restrictions on FX lending

Allows non FX-earnings companies to borrow in FX from
local banks (previously, only FX-earning companies could
borrow FX), provided FX loan amount is greater than
US$5 million and maturity date is longer than a year; bans
consumers from taking out FX-linked loans

June 2009

General provisioning on new loans

Allows banks with CARs above 16 (nearly all banks) to
lower their general provisioning rate from one to zero
percent for cash loans other than credit cards until March
2011; this provisioning rate had been increased from 0.5
to 1.0 percent as a measure under the last SBA

March 2010

Sources: Turkish authorities; and IMF staff.

D. Political Setting
17.
The political calendar is expected to be quite full over the next two years.
Parliamentary elections are due by mid-2011. The ruling Justice and Development (AK)
Party has been in power since 2002. A constitutional reform package was recently approved
by Parliament and goes to referendum in mid-September. A presidential election, for the first
time by direct popular vote, is due in 2012.

17
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks
18.
There was agreement that growth would be strong in the near term, with a
wider current account deficit and above target inflation. For 2010, strong carryover from
a depressed base and robust within-year momentum were expected to propel GDP growth to
6-7 percent. This would be underpinned by private consumption—on account of low real
interest rates—restocking, and, to a lesser extent, exports. The current account deficit was
expected to widen sharply to close to 5 percent of GDP reflecting mostly the growth
recovery, despite a solid increase in export demand. Inflation was projected to be well above
the mid-point of the target band at the end of the year. From 2011, annual growth was
expected to moderate as favorable base effects dissipate, but with continuing quarter-onquarter domestic-led growth. Inflation was expected to subside, but the current account
deficit was seen as gradually increasing, with external debt rising to more than 50 percent of
GDP in 2015. Nonetheless, with only modest remaining exposure to the Fund (SDR 5 billion
outstanding), capacity to repay was not seen as a concern (Appendix I).
19.
Risks to near-term growth were seen as broadly balanced, with the unsettled
situation in Europe posing a two-way hazard (Appendix II). Weaker-than-projected export
demand from Europe (from slower activity and a more depreciated euro), less funding from
EU banks, or a generalized increase in risk aversion may deflate domestic and external
demand. Looking forward, in the event of domestic political uncertainty, confidence may
also weaken. However, the authorities also noted that Turkey’s relatively strong
fundamentals and sound policy framework—soon to be supplemented by a fiscal rule—help
differentiate Turkey from its regional emerging market peers and may attract larger capital
inflows that would boost growth.
20.
Views on longer-term growth prospects were mixed. The authorities considered
that following a temporary dip caused by the recent drop in investment and factor
productivity growth, potential growth could reach 5 percent in the medium term provided
adequate stable long-term capital inflows were secured to finance investment and technology
transfer. The mission expected growth in the medium term to be around 4 percent (average
growth over the last decade was 3.7 percent), supported on the one hand by sound balance
sheets and potential for income convergence, but restrained by weak external
competitiveness and labor market inefficiencies. Removing these obstacles could therefore
improve medium-term growth prospects.
B. Current Account Deficit, Competitiveness, and External Stability
21.
Officials attributed the high correlation between growth and the current account
deficit to structural factors. They saw the cross-border nature of vertically-integrated
production, dependence on imported energy, and a low saving rate brought by the large share
of below-working-age population as supporting a relatively high level of the current account
deficit. Relative prices were seen as playing a modest role, consistent with results of a survey
on the reasons firms demand imported intermediate goods which found that, on average,
respondents assigned a 20 percent weight to cost factors and an 80 percent weight to

18
structural factors that are less likely to respond to changes in the real exchange rate (e.g., lack
of or limited domestic supply, vertically integrated production structure of multinational
firms, and credits provided from abroad). The survey also found that the cost of intermediate
inputs is not only related to the exchange rate, but also to the foreign trade regime (e.g., the
inward processing regime implemented to promote exports and the customs union).4 They
noted that, given the trend nature of the CPI-based real exchange rate, it was therefore not
surprising it was nearing its historical peak, but that 2½-3 percentage points of the annual
increase reflected productivity enhancements in the tradable sector that entail no loss of labor
cost-based competitiveness (Balassa-Samuelson effect). Moreover, attempting to depress the
nominal value of the lira (while not seen as a feasible strategy—see below) would, in any
event, fail to durably improve competitiveness given high pass-through to wages and prices.
Increasing participation in individual retirement plans and the gradual increase underway in
retirement ages were seen as raising the saving rate.5
22.
The mission saw inadequate competitiveness as an important contributor to the
high import elasticity of growth. The cyclical sensitivity of imports is apparent from the
faster growth of imports than domestic demand and GDP during the pre-crisis boom, and
from the much sharper import drop during the downturn. The mission noted the survey
responses could be interpreted as suggesting locally-sourced products had been forced out of
(or had never entered) the market because they could not compete, causing firms to rely
heavily on imported intermediates and depressing domestic value-added in final production.
Moreover, growth in consumption had also become more skewed toward imports at the same
time the real exchange rate had been appreciating. Regarding energy dependence, while
structural reforms are needed to moderate demand for imported energy (see below), in the
interim, competitiveness should be strengthened to generate sufficient export earnings to
cover the cost of energy imports and avoid excessive external debt.6 Staff sees Turkey’s
current account deficit norm at around 2½ percent of GDP, consistent with a considerable
competitiveness gap (Box 4).

4

The CBT’s survey of large industrial firms found the share of imported intermediate goods had increased by
10 percentage points during 2002-07 to 62 percent due to: (i) inadequate quantity and/or quality of domestic
alternatives; (ii) input sourcing decisions taken at headquarters by multinational companies; (iii) a shift from
labor- to capital-intensive products but without a corresponding increase in capacity to produce capital-intensive
intermediates; and (iv) particularly in labor-intensive sectors, resort to cheaper imported intermediate and
investment goods (about 30 percent of respondents).
5

Currently, many individuals start receiving social security pensions in their late 40s. However, reforms in
1999 and 2008 are slowly raising the minimum retirement age, so that most persons will be retiring at age 65 by
the 2060s.
6

This contrasts with temporary structural factors, such as income convergence and a young population, that
support a higher current account deficit norm today in view of the future improvement in export potential they
will generate to facilitate repayment of previously accumulated external debt.

19
Box 4. External Competitiveness
From several perspectives, Turkey is experiencing a considerable competitiveness gap:


Based on CGER-type assessments, staff estimates that Turkey has a considerable
competitiveness gap, based on the results of the three standard methodologies. The current
account norm (-2.4 percent of GDP) reflects mainly Turkey’s low old-age dependency ratio
(supporting a high saving rate), but that is partially offset by a sizable per-capita income
differential and fast-growing population (pushing up investment and lowering saving).



REER price-based indices increased considerably in recent months owing to nominal
appreciation and persistent inflation differentials. Both the CPI- and PPI-based REERs rose by
about 9 percent during December 2009-June 2010, approaching their historical peaks.



The ULC-based REER index dropped by about one-third during mid-2008 to Q1 2010,
deviating from its previous tendency to co-move with price-based REERs and signaling a
significant improvement in labor competitiveness, although the current level remains 12 percent
above the 2003 level.1/ Given recent increases in employment and the rising minimum wage, the
decline in the ULC REER suggests that (consistent with reports heard by the mission) since the
onset of the crisis, firms have shifted part of their workforce—or part of the activities of
individual workers—to the informal sector in order to save on labor costs and increase
employment flexibility. There is, however, a limit to the future savings that can be obtained
through this strategy.



The market share of Turkey’s exports in major advanced country imports has been stagnant in
recent years. Moreover, recent declines in penetration of emerging market and fuel exporters’
markets have started to reverse the significant gains of earlier years.



While export growth has been fairly rapid during the pre- and post-crisis periods (which may be
suggestive of strong competitiveness), the import content of domestic demand and exports has
risen steadily, implying a declining domestic content in products destined to satisfy domestic and
external demand. This reflects in part the assembly-type nature of Turkey’s rapidly expanding
sectors, including transport vehicles. As a result of the low domestic content, these industries
may be footloose and, as experience in Central and Eastern Europe shows, willing to uproot to
more competitive countries.
___________________________

1/

The ULC REER data was first published by the CBT in July 2010.

20
2

Box 4. External Competitiveness (cont.)

23.
With growth resuming, the Turkish economy has reverted to its pre-crisis
unbalanced path, even as global and domestic uncertainties have resurfaced. A small
fraction of the global flood of liquidity is making its way to Turkey, fuelling credit, boosting
consumption and investment, and financing imports. The mission noted that while fewer
inflows would reduce the current account deficit, with growth dependent on imports, this
would severely depress activity. Therefore, low reserve cover and the shorter duration of
capital inflows constitute important risks to the stability of financing and GDP. In addition,
persistent inflation differentials may promote a cycle of real overvaluation and even greater
import dependence that would eventually drag down growth. Typically, such cycles do not
unwind gradually, and the external financing needed to sustain them—particularly if short
term—will be sensitive to risk perceptions. To ameliorate these concerns, the mission urged
decisive action to strengthen competitiveness.

2

21
C. Policies
24.
The policy discussions focused on ways to enhance growth performance and
reduce vulnerabilities. The authorities emphasized the appropriate timing and pace at which
to withdraw policy stimulus, including through implementation of the new fiscal rule. The
mission advocated countercyclical macro policies to contain the current account deficit and
inflation, together with structural reforms to improve competitiveness and reduce dependence
on imports. A policy mix that emphasizes early fiscal adjustment was seen as moderating the
need for monetary tightening that, in the presence of large, interest-sensitive capital flows,
could otherwise compromise the external objective.
Fiscal policy
25.
With the authorities expected to review their fiscal targets in the coming weeks,
the mission urged avoiding a procyclical policy stance in 2010. Staff expected revenue to
overperform considerably because: (i) the 2009 revenue outturn was 0.9 percent of GDP
higher than assumed in the 2010 budget; and (ii) 2010 nominal GDP growth is projected to
be 6 percent higher than budgeted. Staff urged the authorities to save revenue
overperformance by adhering closely to budgeted spending levels and maintaining current
tax and formula-based energy pricing policies.7 Under staff’s revenue projection, this would
improve the primary balance to at least 0.6 percent of GDP (compared to the current target of
-0.3) and ensure a sizable structural improvement. Such an approach would help contain the
current account deficit and inflation pressures, while limiting private sector crowding out,
promoting the new fiscal rule’s success by reducing required adjustment in 2011 (see below),
and reinforcing Turkey’s fiscal discipline credentials. Given heightened global uncertainties
and a desire for prudent forecasting, the authorities indicated they do not intend to revise up
significantly their revenue projections and did not indicate how a substantial revenue
overrun—should it arrive—might be deployed.

7

Under staff’s recommended approach, nominal spending in the budget would be augmented only for the ad
hoc January 2010 pension increase, formula-based increases in revenue sharing with local governments, and
mandatory inflation-indexed increases in wages and pensions.

22
Selected Fiscal Variables, 2008–10
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted)
2008

2009

2010

Original
MTP 1/

Actual

Original No saving revenue
Saving revenue
MTP 1/ overperformance 2/ overperformance 3/

Nonfinancial public sector
Primary balance
Cyclically adjusted primary balance 4/
Fiscal effort 5/
Cumulative fiscal effort from 2008 5/
Overall balance

1.6
0.2
-0.7
…
-2.8

-2.1
-0.6
-0.8
-0.8
…

-1.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
-5.6

-0.3
0.8
1.4
0.7
…

-0.3
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-4.1

0.6
0.8
0.8
0.6
-3.3

General government debt (EU defined)

39.5

47.3

45.4

49.0

44.1

43.1

Memorandum items:
Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator growth (percent)

0.7
12.0

-6.0
6.0

-4.7
5.4

3.5
5.0

6.1
8.2

6.1
8.2

Sources: Turkish authorites; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Numbers in the authorities' September 2009 Medium-Term Plan (MTP). Cyclically adjusted balances are imputed by staff.
2/ Assumes the authorities maintain the 2010 primary surplus target in the MTP of -0.3 percent of GDP (under staff's macro which
assumes higher-than-budgeted growth and revenue).
3/ Assumes the authorities stick to budgeted limits for discretionary spending in 2010 and save all revenue overperformance above
inflation adjustments to pension and wages, obligatory local government transfers, and the Jan. pension increase.
4/ Percent of potential GDP. Cyclical adjustments are made using staff's assumptions for potential growth and the cyclical sensitivity
of the primary balance.
5/ Fiscal effort is defined as the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance.

26.
From 2011, the government will apply a deficit-based fiscal rule, which it viewed
as a major addition to Turkey’s institutional framework—on a par with central bank
independence and inflation targeting.8 The proposed rule requires (allows) a specific
amount of tightening (loosening) each year in proportion to how far the overall deficit is
above (below) the medium-term target (set at 1 percent of GDP) and GDP growth is in
excess (falls short) of its average long-term real growth rate (set at 5 percent) (see
Appendix III). The rule binds the general government, with a separate balanced budget
requirement for the state enterprise sector. Accompanying improvements to public financial
management procedures include more transparent and comprehensive reporting of fiscal
projections and outturns, some tightening of oversight over local government borrowing, and
elimination of some loopholes to deliver spending outturns more in line with the target.
27.
Staff agreed the rule provides a prudent anchor, but urged further reforms to
underpin implementation. With the parameters chosen by the authorities, the deficit and
debt are expected to moderate under a wide range of scenarios notwithstanding that, with a
value of 5 percent, the average long-term real growth rate exceeds staff’s estimate of
medium-term growth.9 Regarding 2011, if—as recommended—most 2010 revenue
overperformance is saved, no additional fiscal adjustment would be needed to meet the 2011

8

Fiscal rule legislation has been submitted to parliament and is expected to be approved by end July.

9

This is because the entire set of parameters collectively determines the targets set by the rule.

23
target, but if overperformance is not saved, 0.3 percent of GDP of new measures would be
required (Box 5). 10 However, with the rule setting only a ceiling on the deficit, consideration
should be given to doing better than the rule to address current account and inflation
concerns while relieving the burden on monetary policy. Further improvements to the
implementing framework are needed to safeguard the target, including mechanisms to ensure
timely implementation of within-year corrective measures, strengthen fiscal coordination
between central and local governments, and encourage conservative budget forecasts.
However, strength of commitment will ultimately determine the success of the rule.
28.
The authorities recognized the fiscal rule was not a substitute for needed
structural reforms. The authorities reported that tax administration was being strengthened
by increasing the number of auditors and through pending legislation to institute mechanisms
to promote more uniform and transparent tax opinions. Staff noted that the Revenue
Administration would also benefit from increased budget flexibility and urged that these
enhanced capacities be used to increase scrutiny of wage reporting in conjunction with the
Social Security Institution, while ensuring continued improvements in audit procedures and
evenhandedness across all tax payers to promote better voluntary tax compliance. In addition,
the mission urged continued implementation of measures to control healthcare, wage, and
pension expenditure. Indeed, restraining public sector wage growth could also help moderate
private sector wages. Staff regretted the ad hoc pension increase in January 2010 that
breached the CPI indexation principle established in the 2008 social security reform and
essential to support pension system sustainability. The authorities confirmed they intend to
apply only CPI indexation for the semi-annual July 2010 increase.
Monetary and exchange rate policies
29.
The CBT views its post-crisis exit strategy, which focuses on normalizing
liquidity conditions, as distinct from short-term interest rates decisions taken to bring
inflation into line with medium-term inflation targets. With the CBT’s daily FX
purchases providing a stable supply of lira liquidity and reduced risk of liquidity disruptions,
the CBT intends to gradually withdraw the exceptional liquidity support it supplied during
the crisis. The pace of withdrawal will be determined flexibly in response to market
conditions, including possible spillovers from external events. Initial steps have been taken,
with a modest reduction in the amount of short-term repo funding and a small increase in the
FX reserve ratio and, as a result, market interest rates have begun to pick up slightly. Further

10

The draft fiscal rule legislation requires general government deficits to be measured according to ESA-95
accounting principles. This will entail discrete changes to the fiscal numbers currently reported by both the
authorities and Fund staff. For example, privatization receipts will be removed from the authorities’ definition
of revenue, while state bank dividends will be added to the staff definition (developed under previous SBAs for
program monitoring purposes). Net differences with staff’s definition are expected to be less than 0.3 percent of
GDP. The transition to the new definition should be managed carefully to ensure transparency.

24
adjustments in reserve requirements will be implemented if credit growth is excessive and a
risk to macroeconomic stability.
Box 5. Near-Term Implications of the Fiscal Rule
How fiscal policy is implemented in 2010 and how the rule’s ceiling is treated will affect the fiscal paths:


If the current fiscal target for 2010 (-0.3 percent of GDP) is maintained, reducing the general
government overall deficit from around 4¼ percent of GDP in 2010 to 2¾ percent of GDP
by 2013 as dictated by the rule requires cumulative discretionary (“discretionary” because the
rule automatically adjusts for the growth cycle) adjustment of 1.3 percent of GDP. This would
reduce the general government debt ratio by about 2 percentage points.



If most revenue overperformance in 2010 is saved, deficit targets during 2010–13 would be lower
and the debt reduction would be larger, but the needed cumulative discretionary adjustment
during 2011-13 would be limited to 0.5 percent of GDP.



With the rule only setting a ceiling on the deficit, fiscal policy is permitted to be tighter than the
rule. This may be warranted if economic conditions prevail that are not captured by the rule (such
as financing constraints or current account considerations). In any event, good practice suggests
the ceiling should be treated as a “third rail” that is typically overperformed. Doing so requires
prudent budgeting and adequate buffers to ensure the rule is met under most contingencies. If
such mechanisms lead to overperformance against the rule by 0.3 percent of GDP per year on
average and if revenue overperformance in 2010 is saved, the discretionary adjustment required
during 2011-13 would still be smaller than in the baseline, but with much faster debt and deficit
reduction.

25
30.
With inflation expectations above-target amid strong credit and domestic
demand growth, the CBT intends to initiate a limited tightening of monetary policy to
gradually bring inflation back to target. The CBT expects the recent spike in inflation to
moderate as temporary factors dissipate and some product market rigidities are relaxed.
Nonetheless, with domestic demand growing more rapidly than external demand and the
output gap in the nontradables sector nearly closed, the CBT expects to increase policy
interest rates beginning in the last quarter of 2010, with the timing and magnitude dependent
on domestic and international developments.11 CBT officials viewed credit as the main
transmission channel for monetary policy, with an increase in the policy interest rate
moderating demand for new loans and, hence, demand for locally-made products. As a result,
nontradables inflation would be dampened, but leaving the nominal exchange rate and capital
flows little affected. While tightening would also be consistent with the CBT’s financial
stability mandate, monetary policy officials saw potential for more restrictive fiscal and
macroprudential policies to moderate domestic demand, thereby limiting the need to raise
policy interest rates. Going forward, they saw the fiscal rule as improving the predictability
of monetary policy.
31.
The mission considered that a more accelerated reversal of monetary stimulus
was warranted under its baseline. Policies are needed to moderate credit growth to further
dampen inflation expectations and keep the current account deficit in check. This task is
made more difficult by surplus global liquidity and low interest rates in the advanced
economies. But delaying may necessitate an even sharper response that creates further
complications by attracting large short-term inflows and hurting banks because of their
maturity mismatches. Therefore, a broad-based monetary tightening—through reversal of
CBT liquidity support and a series of small increases in the policy rate—should be brought
forward. An even faster monetary tightening would be needed if the required fiscal
adjustment on a cyclically-adjusted basis is not forthcoming. However, in the event global
growth appears sets to slow sharply (which—consistent with the WEO—is not staff’s current
baseline), there was agreement that monetary tightening could be halted and possibly
reversed.
32.
Parties agreed on the need to further accumulate reserves, but opinions differed
on whether to step up the amount of regular pre-announced FX purchases. The mission
noted that with the duration of debt becoming shorter, reserve cover of short-term debt would
recover only slowly under current auction amounts. Therefore, should capital inflows remain
stable or strengthen, the amount of daily preannounced FX purchases—within the current
floating exchange rate regime—could be increased modestly (but keeping the amount small
relative to daily interbank FX turnover) to more quickly accumulate reserves, as well as lean
against a compression of tradables prices that would further push demand toward imports.
11

Subsequent to the mission, the CBT indicated that in view of slowing exports to Europe and the recent
decline in inflation, low levels of interest rates can be maintained for a long period.

26
However, the CBT was wary of this strategy unless accompanied by larger, more stable,
inflows. Moreover, they doubted whether this would deliver a weaker lira since stepping up
significantly the amount of reserves would boost confidence and attract more inflows that
would tend to make the currency a one-way bet, particularly if the purchases were sterilized.
Financial sector policies
33.
Better coherence between monetary and financial sector policies could be
achieved by quickly phasing out relaxed regulations on general provisioning and
classification of restructured loans. The authorities saw maintaining these measures
until 2011 as necessary to encourage banks to roll over existing loans. The mission is of the
view that while temporary easing of prudential norms may have been appropriate in the midst
of the crisis to discourage panic responses, recent extensions and broadening are unwarranted
amid rapid credit growth. Moreover, relaxation of prudential regulations obscures assessment
of asset quality and understates NPL ratios, which may also be supported by temporarily low
real interest rates. It also weakens sound risk management practices by banks that are
essential to avoiding a deterioration in fundamentals as lending is expanded to offset the
impact of falling interest margins on profits.
34.
Several other recent and prospective changes to Turkey’s prudential framework
were discussed:


Credit card debt: In view of the high NPL rate on credit card debt (about 10 percent),
the mission endorsed the proposal to disallow increases in credit limits if the
cardholder is unable to consistently make on-time payments of the monthly minimum
balance due.



FX lending: The mission welcomed the 2009 prohibition on FX-indexed lending to
households. They noted that lifting the restriction on onshore unhedged large-volume
lending in FX may only represent a shift from offshore branches, but cautioned that
lending in FX to unhedged firms—even prominent companies—is risky given global
uncertainties and the prevailing competitiveness gap. The mission advocated
assigning higher-than-standard risk weights on FX loans to unhedged businesses and
requiring banks to report to the BRSA the volume of such lending and associated loan
performance on a monthly basis.



Banks’ issuance of lira-denominated bonds: While the BRSA’s recent refusal of
banks’ request to issue lira bonds helps limit banks’ reliance on possibly volatile
wholesale funding, it also hampers their ability to reduce their maturity mismatch and
discourages longer-term lending. The mission therefore supported the BRSA’s
intention to reconsider this ban once uncertainty in Europe abates. They cautioned,
however, that with much of this new funding expected to be funneled to mortgage
lending—thereby making such credit accessible to a new class of borrower—the

27



BRSA should closely oversee banks’ internal assessments of this category of credit
risk and ensure appropriate norms are applied on borrowers’ debt servicing capacity,
complementing existing protections.12
Too big to fail: While Turkey’s banking sector is not especially concentrated (the
three largest private banks account for around 40 percent of sector assets and the
largest bank is state owned), the authorities were keen to address possible risks from
concentration, drawing on the ongoing international dialogue on systemically
important financial institutions. The mission advised that policies be calibrated to
Turkey’s specific circumstances and phased in gradually to limit possible disruptions
in the financial system.

35.
Important aspects of a sound framework for financial sector supervision,
contingency planning, and crisis management are in place, but some additional
measures are recommended. With increased regional financial stability risks, bank-by-bank
data on lira and FX liquidity requirements are collected daily and interactions with European
supervisors have increased. Domestically, cooperation and exchange of information between
relevant government and supervisory institutions have also been stepped up. Further
improvements should be made by: (i) incorporating into stress tests the indirect effects of
market risk on banks’ credit portfolios to provide a more accurate assessment of banks’
resilience, while also employing more complex scenarios (such as possible direct and indirect
implications of unsettled international financial markets); (ii) better collecting and
monitoring of data on unlisted companies—which comprise the vast majority of the business
sector and account for a large share of direct foreign borrowing—to help identify systemic
vulnerabilities in a timely manner; and (iii) implementing regulatory and legislative changes
to expedite resolution of failed banks—a key recommendation of the 2007 FSAP
(Appendix IV). The authorities have requested an FSAP update for 2011.
Structural reforms
36.
The authorities viewed rapid economic growth, combined with lower labor taxes,
as essential to creating employment. Policies instituted to encourage job creation include a
permanent 5 percentage point cut in employers’ social security premiums and increased
funding for active labor market policies. However, permanently reducing unemployment was
seen to depend on sustaining high GDP growth rates and, over the longer term, better
tailoring education to employers’ needs.
37.
The mission interpreted the downward rigidity of unemployment as indicative of
inefficiencies in the labor market and urged actions to promote job-rich growth and
enhance competitiveness. Turkey’s high minimum wage, generous severance pay scheme,
12

The 2007 mortgage law established a maximum loan-to-value ratio of 75 percent for residential mortgages
and 50 percent for commercial mortgages.

28
and tight restrictions on temporary employment contribute to the low domestic content of
production by encouraging firms to substitute imported capital and intermediate goods for
labor and domestically sourced inputs. To promote job creation in the formal sector and
enhance competitiveness of exporters—which are more likely than other firms to operate in
the formal sector—formal sector labor costs and regulations should be reduced to better align
them with practices in comparable EU and OECD countries, accompanied by efforts to
shrink the shadow economy. This would avoid a drop in tax collections that may result from
minimum wage restraint (since many workers declare only the minimum wage rather than
their true income), and a permanent improvement in tax compliance could support a revenueneutral cut in labor and other taxes borne by producers.
38.
Structural policies could also narrow the current account deficit by increasing
fiscal savings to be used for competitiveness-enhancing tax cuts or deficit reduction
beyond that required by the fiscal rule. Accelerating the phase-in of higher retirement ages
(currently, many individuals start receiving social security pensions in their late 40s) would
reduce pension spending and increase formality by delaying the transition from employment
in the formal sector to working as a pensioner in the shadow economy. Sustained and
uniform application of energy pass-through pricing formulas would also narrow the current
account deficit by increasing fiscal savings and reducing dependence on imported energy.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
39.
Far-reaching reforms and solid macroeconomic policies instituted in the
aftermath of Turkey’s 2000-01 crisis paid invaluable dividends during the recent global
financial crisis. Persistent fiscal primary surpluses, conservative monetary policy in the
context of inflation targeting, and overhaul of banking supervision and regulation helped
contain pre-crisis vulnerabilities relative to other countries in the region. Healthy balance
sheets of banks and households, supported by the reflow of international capital and the
authorities’ decisive policy response made possible by the previously prudent stance of
policies, prompted an early and robust credit-led rebound.
40.
Sustaining the recovery while limiting external imbalances requires bringing
forward the exit from crisis-related stimulus and implementing reforms to moderate
import dependence. Policies should restrain domestic demand and lower the cost of formal
sector employment. With relaxed monetary policy in advanced countries creating a large
pool of interest-sensitive capital flows and with inflation pressures moderating at home,
emphasis should be on structural reforms, fiscal restraint, and macro-prudential policies.
Indeed, if Turkey’s recovery falters due, for example, to increased risk aversion or weaker
global demand, halting or even reversing the monetary tightening would be appropriate, but
structural reforms and fiscal consolidation on a cyclically adjusted basis should continue to
maintain confidence in external and fiscal sustainability.

29
41.
Further unwinding the recent fiscal stimulus is needed to contain domestic
demand and promote fiscal sustainability. For 2010, saving revenue overperformance in
excess of mandatory spending increases while maintaining existing tax policies and the
energy pricing formula is warranted to avoid procyclicality and promote domestic saving. It
would also limit the need to sharply tighten monetary policy, promote successful
implementation of the fiscal rule in 2011—its inaugural year—by reducing the required
adjustment next year, more quickly moderate public debt, and signal the government’s
commitment to avoid pre-election spending.
42.
The new fiscal rule is an important addition to Turkey’s policy framework, but
fully realizing its disciplining role requires continuous political commitment and
adequate supporting savings. The rule’s formulation, choice of parameters, and
comprehensiveness of institutional coverage will together establish prudent, feasible, and
appropriately countercyclical deficit ceilings. Envisaged improvements in transparency and
elimination of spending loopholes are welcome. However, the framework should be further
strengthened by ensuring prudent forecasts, timely implementation of within-year corrective
measures, and improved coordination within general government. With only reputational
sanctions, strong political backing and sufficient measures will be essential to sustain the
rule. Evenhanded strengthening of tax administration and containment of spending pressures,
including through a possible accelerated phase-in of higher retirement ages, will therefore be
needed.
43.
Bringing forward a moderate tightening of monetary conditions could obviate
the need for a sharper and larger tightening later on. A delayed tightening could be
counterproductive by attracting sizable capital inflows and be detrimental to banks because
of their maturity mismatch. Tightening should be broad based with the aim of raising real
borrowing costs and moderating inflation expectations. Greater recourse to contractionary
monetary policy—with its attendant risks—would be needed if the appropriate fiscal
adjustment is not forthcoming.
44.
Modestly increasing regular FX purchases would accelerate reserve buildup at a
time when the quality of external financing has declined. This would not compromise the
freely flexible exchange rate—which staff strongly endorses— under the inflation targeting
framework or create expectations of one-way currency movements. It could, however, give
support to external competitiveness by leaning against the wind of lira appreciation.
45.
Financial sector forbearance measures should be quickly phased out and
macroprudential tools strengthened. With credit growing at a rapid clip, relaxed
regulations on loan classification and provisioning are unnecessary and could impede an
accurate assessment of credit quality and encourage imprudent lending decisions. Future
risks should be averted by tightening regulations on credit card debt limits, increasing risk
weights on lending in foreign currency to unhedged firms, and ensuring banks apply sound

30
debt service limits on mortgage borrowers. Doing so would also enhance coordination with,
and strengthen the effectiveness of, monetary policy.
46.
Further improvements in supervision and crisis management are needed, while
changes in regulations may be warranted to reflect initiatives at the international level.
Stress tests should be updated to better reflect the indirect impact of market risk and utilize
more realistic shock scenarios. Capacity to respond to bank distress, including the legal
authority to resolve a troubled bank, should be strengthened. Any amendments to the
regulatory framework to reduce the risk from systemically important institutions should be
tailored to Turkey-specific conditions and introduced gradually to avoid unnecessary
dislocation.
47.
Reducing dependence on external savings requires rebuilding competitiveness
and moderating demand for energy imports. Better aligning Turkey’s productivityadjusted employment costs with those of regional peers would foster formal-sector jobs and
reduce the import content of production. Doing so requires lowering the minimum wage
(especially in low-income regions), scaling back severance benefits, and allowing more
flexible work practices. This approach would be more effective and less distortive than the
current practice of selective tax breaks. Realigning the minimum wage should be
accompanied by better tax enforcement to avoid a drop in revenue on account of the high
proportion of tax filers who declare the minimum wage. A permanent increase in tax revenue
would also facilitate a revenue-neutral cut in labor and other business taxes. Sustained,
uniform application of the energy cost pass-through pricing formula would promote
conservation and investment in more efficient generation capacity and in renewables, thereby
moderating demand for imported energy.
48.
It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Turkey be held on the
standard 12-month cycle.

31
Figure 1. Turkey: Pre-Crisis Strengths and Vulnerabilities, 2007 1/
20
10

Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

20

50

10

40

0

0

30
20

-10

-10

Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

-20
-30
Emerging
Market

Europe

Latin
America

Asia

50

Private Capital Flows
(Percent of GDP)
Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

40
30
20

10

10

-20

0

0

-30

-10

-10
Emerging
Market

Turkey

Europe

Latin
America

Asia

Turkey

150

600

125

500

100

400

75

300

50

50

200

200

25

25

100

100

150

External Debt
(Percent of GDP)

125

Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

100
75

0

0
Emerging
Market
75
60

Europe

Latin
America

Change in the Real
Effective Exchange Rate,
2003-07 (Percent)

45

Asia

75

75

60

60

30

30

15

15

0

0

-15

-15

-30

Emerging
Market
150

Europe

Latin
America

Gross Public Debt
(Percent of GDP)

Asia

100

15

50

15
10

100

50

0
Emerging
Market

Europe

Latin
America

Asia

Turkey

Asia

Turkey
75
60
45
30
15

-15
-30
Europe

Latin
America

Asia

Turkey
15

Cyclically-Adjusted Primary Balance
(Percent of potential GDP)

10

5

5
0

0
Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

-5
0

Latin
America

0

Emerging
Market
150

Europe

0

Turkey

Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

300

Change in
Private Sector Credit,
2003-2007 (Percent of GDP)
Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

45

30

-15

400

0
Emerging
Market

45

500

0

Turkey

Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

600

Reserve Coverage
(Percent of short-term debt
and current account deficit)
Mean
5th percentile
Median
95thpercentile

-5

-10

-10
Emerging
Market

Europe

Latin
America

Asia

Turkey

Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics; IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Sample includes all emerging market countries in the IMF Vulnerability exercise, including oil producers in Africa and the
Middle East. Regional means are weighted by GDP. Europe Region excludes Russia.

32
Figure 2. Turkey: Real Sector Developments, 2006−10
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
After collapsing in late 2008 and early 2009,
the economy rebounded sharply ...

15

15

Real GDP Growth

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

Year-on-year
Quarter-on-quarter (sa)

-15

-15
2006

2007

2008

2009

25

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

15

5

5

-5

-5

-20
-25

50

30
20
10

Agriculture (11%)
Industry (28%)
Construction (6%)
Services (55%)

-15
-25
2006

2007

2008

-15
-25
2009

2010

…with consumer confidence rising
and remaining strong.

120

Consumer Confidence Indicators (2002=100)

110
100

100

90
80
80
60

70

CNBC

60
2007

2008

2009

2010

Sources: Turkstat; CNBC; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Values in parentheses denote shares of total value added in 2009.

2007

2008

-15
-20
-25
2009

2010

Short-term indicators suggest
recovery is underway...

50

Short-term Activity Indicators
(3-month moving avg. of q-o-q growth)
Industrial production
Real sector confidence
Capacity utilization
White goods sales

40
30
20
10
0

0
-10

-10

-20

-20

-30
2006

-30
2007

2008

2009

2010

Recovery in 2010 will be sharp
owing mostly to base effects.

10

10

Real GDP and Output Gap

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2
Output gap

-4

Turkstat (right scale)
40
2006

Investment
Net exports
Consumption
Real GDP growth (percent)

-15

40

15

15

10

2006

25

Production Components of GDP 1/
(Year-on-year percent change)

20

Contributions to Y-o-Y GDP Growth

15

2010

After initially declining, nearly all production
sectors, recovered strongly,
particularly manufacturing.

…helped initially by a strong
rebound in consumption.

20

-4

Real GDP growth

-6

-6
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

33
Figure 3. Turkey: Inflation Developments, 2006–10
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)

16

After the record low Oct. 2009 inflation figure
(5.1 percent), inflation rebounded in 2010, before
moderating more recently...
Virtual HICP 1/
Headline CPI
Core-I 2/

CPI Inflation
(12-month change)
12

...driven by a reversal in food prices.

16

Annual CPI Inflation (Contributions) 3/

16
12
12

8

8

4

0
2006

110
100

2007

2008

2009

(Percentage of individual items in CPI whose price
increased by more than
4 percent over previous 12 months )

90

Alcohol and tobacco

Energy

Core-I 2/

16

12

8

8

4

4

4

0

0
2006

2010

There are some indications of
broad-based price pressures...

Food

110
100

14

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

...that were until recently
reflected into higher services prices.

14

12-month CPI Inflation

12

12

10

10

8

8

90

80

80

70

70

60

60

50
2006

50

6

6

Goods
Services

2008

2009

2010

An increasing trend that annual
PPI was also showing until May 2010...

25
20

2007

Producer Price Index
(12-month change)

25

12

20

10

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
General

-5

Manufacturing

-10
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

4
2006

4
2007

2008

2009

2010

…and that translated into
higher CPI inflation expectations, which could
reverse if inflation continues falling.
Inflation: Actual, Targets, and
Forecast s (Percent)

12
10

8

8

6

6

4

Actual

4

CBT Midpoint forecast

-5

2

-10

0
2008

Targets

Inflations expectations
survey (July, 2010)

2
0

2009

2010

2011

2012

Sources: Turkstat; CBT; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Inflation decomposition a la Mody and Ohnsorge, 2007. Virtual inflation captures the inflation that would prevail if inflation at the
level of detailed subitems of Turkey's HICP basket were the same as the respective EU-27 average.
2/ Index "I" excludes food, nonalcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and gold.
3/ Calculated based on 2010 weights.

34
Figure 4. Turkey: External Sector Developments, 2006−10
Exports collapsed at the onset of the global crisis,
but rebounded in the latter part of
2009 for all types of goods.

75

Export Values (3-month average, y-o-y) 1/

75

50

50

25

25

0

0
Consumption (35%)

-25

-25

Intermediate (54%)

60

Imports have shown a larger decline,
and an even stronger recovery driven by a rebound
in all types of imported goods.
Import Values (3-month average, y-o-y) 1/

30

30

0

0

-30

40

-50
2007

2008

2009

2010

In volume terms, import contraction, which initially
outpaced the decline in exports, has been fully
reversed with import growth surpassing exports ...
Trade Volume (12-month change of
3-month moving average)

40

-30

Consumption (13%)
Intermediate (73%)

Capital (10%)
-50
2006

60

-60
2006

Capital (14%)
2007

-60

2008

2009

2010

... thus recently reversing the crisis-induced
improvement in the current account deficit.

20

20

Rolling 12-month Current Account
(Billions of U.S. dollars)
0

0

20

20

0

0

-20

-20

-40

-40

-60
2006

Total

-20

Exports

-20

Nonfuel

-40

Imports
-40
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

The widening current account deficit is being
increasingly financed by debt-creating flows…

40

Debt Creating Flows (Billions of U.S. dollars)

30

30

Debt
Nondebt

20

40

10

0

0
-10
-20

-20
2008

2009

2008

2010

Sources: Turkstat; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Values in parentheses denote shares of total in April, 2010.

2009

2010

...at short-term maturities.

60

60

Net Capital Flows by Maturity
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

45

Short-term debt

45

30

Medium and
long-term debt

30

20

10

-10

-60
2007

15

15

0

0

-15

-15
2008

2009

2010

35
Figure 5. Turkey: Banking System, 2006–10
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Bank profitability and capital
adequacy ratios remain high.

30

4

Profitability (Percent)

400

Funding, mostly through lira deposit accumulation,
improved throughout 2009...
Deposits

100

350
3
25

80

300
250

2

60
200

20
1
CAR
ROE
ROA (right scale)

15
2006

2007

2008

40
Lira (billions of Turkish lira)

100

FX (billions of U.S. dollars, right scale)
0
2009

2010

...although lending only started to
pick up in the latter part of 2009...
300

150

50
2006

20
2007

40
80

200

2010

Loans by Borrower Group
(Year-on-year percent change)

100

250

2009

...particularly for consumer loans...

50

Loans

2008

Consumer
Corporate

30

50
40
30

20

20

10

10

0

0

60
150
40

100

Lira (billions of Turkish lira)
FX (billions of U.S. dollars, rhs)

50
2006

8

20
2007

2008

2009

-10
-10
Jan-08 May-08 Oct-08 Mar-09 Aug-09 Jan-10 Jun-10

2010

...while asset quality deterioration is receding...

...and bank holdings of government
securities have recently stabilized.

8

300

6

6

260

4

4

220

30

2

180

25

0

140
2006

Nonperforming Loans to Total Loans (Percent)

2

Turkish Banks' Holdings of Government Securities
Total portfolio securities
(billions of Turkish lira)

40

35

Total portfolio securities
(percent of total assets, rhs)

NPLs (BRSA)
Past due loans (CBT)
0
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Sources: BRSA; CBT; and IMF staff calculations.

20
2007

2008

2009

2010

36
Figure 6. Turkey: Financial Indicators, 2007–10
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
The lira has recovered from its March lows, but
remains below Pre-Lehman levels...

1.1

1.5

...helped by a stock market
that reached record highs...

80

1600

Stock market (000s,
ISE 100 index)

1.2

Emerging markets
MSCI (right scale)

1.7

1.3

60

1200

1.4
1.9
1.5
40

1.6

800

2.1
Lira per dollar

1.7
1.8
2007

Lira per euro (rhs)
2008

2.3
2009

2010

...and was one of the best performing
among emerging market peers.

75

75

Equities (Percent change since
end-Aug., 2008)

50

20
2007

0

0

Bulgaria

Russia

S. Africa

Poland

...in line with trends for CDS spreads...

1000

800

Hungary

-75

Phil.

-75

Brazil

-50

Indonesia

-50

Turkey

-25

Ukraine

-25

5-year Credit
Default Swaps
(Spread, bps)

800

900
750

EMBI+
composite (basis
points)

600

600

450

450

300

300

150
2007

1000

2010

EMBI+ Turkey
(basis points)

750
25

2009

Similarly, as in other emerging markets, external
spreads have fallen to Pre-Lehman levels...

900

50

25

400
2008

25

150
2008

2009

2010

...and government domestic bond yields that have
fallen, broadly in line with CBT rate cuts.

25

20

20

15

15

Turkey
600

600

Brazil
Russia

400

400

200

200

10

Domestic benchmark
bond rate

10

CBT Policy rate (o/n
borrowing)
0
2007

0
2008

Source: Bloomberg.

2009

2010

5
2007

5
2008

2009

2010

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45
Table 7. Banking System at a Glance, 2007–10
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2007

2008

2009

2010 1/

Banking system
Assets (percent of GDP)
Loans / total assets
Government securities / total assets
Loans / total deposits
Year-on-year loan growth
Funds borrowed / total assets
NPLs (gross, percent of total loans)
Provisioning ratio (percent of NPLs)

69.0
48.9
28.3
79.7
30.3
12.3
3.6
86.8

77.1
49.8
26.5
80.2
28.7
12.7
3.8
79.8

87.4
46.6
31.5
75.6
6.9
10.3
5.6
83.6

78.5
48.0
32.0
77.3
27.1
10.7
5.1
82.9

State-owned Banks
Assets (percent of GDP)
Loans / total assets
Government securities / total assets
Loans / total deposits
Year-on-year loan growth
Deposits/total Assets
Funds borrowed / total assets
NPLs (gross, percent of total loans)
Provisioning ratio (percent of NPLs)

21.0
38.2
39.5
54.2
32.5
70.5
5.1
4.1
96.0

23.5
41.1
38.2
58.8
36.1
69.9
5.7
3.8
87.9

28.2
40.7
39.9
60.3
19.3
67.6
4.8
4.5
86.6

25.4
41.7
40.7
60.9
27.0
68.5
5.6
4.4
84.8

100.1
84.6
24.0
33.4

100.0
86.9
28.6
33.5

100.2
93.4
26.6
31.6

99.9
93.7
27.0
30.3

Capital ratios (Banking system)
Capital adequacy ratio
Shareholders' equity / total assets

18.9
13.0

18.0
11.8

20.6
13.3

20.0
13.6

Profitability and liquidity ratio (Banking system)
Return on assets 2/
Return on equity 2/
Liquid assets / total assets 3/

2.8
21.6
37.1

1.8
15.5
26.6

2.4
18.3
33.0

2.8
21.6
33.2

62
29
38
50
167,760
8,122

62
29
39
49
182,665
9,304

63
31
39
49
184,205
9,581

63
31
39
49
186,620
9,601

Balance sheet and quality of loans

FX exposure (Banking system)
FX assets / FX liabilities (including off-balance sheet items)
FX assets / FX liabilities (on-balance sheet only)
FX loans / total loans
FX deposits / total deposits

Memorandum items:
Share of assets held by the five largest banks
Share of assets held by the three largest public banks
Share of assets held by the three largest private banks
Number of banks
Number of employees
Number of branches

Sources: BRSA; CBT; Turkish Banker's Association; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ As of March 2010.
2/ Annualized for March 2010.
3/ Calculated for Deposit Money Banks by the Turkish Banker's Association.

46
APPENDIX I. DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS AND CAPACITY TO REPAY THE FUND
Public debt is projected to moderate as a share of GDP, but large shocks could
interrupt its decline. Under the baseline, both general government debt (EU definition) and
nonfinancial public sector net debt decline over the projection period (Appendix Table I.1).
Standard tests, which do not include the endogenous fiscal adjustment required under the
planned fiscal rule (for stress tests of the fiscal rule’s endogenous response, see
Appendix III), indicate that public debt sustainability is generally robust to various
combinations of shocks, although sizable contingent liabilities or large exchange rate
depreciations would generate large initial jumps in the debt ratio. An alternative no-policyadjustment scenario (keeping the deficit unchanged at its 2009 level) or a much slower
recovery than projected (real GDP growth 1.5 percentage points lower each year
during 2011–15) would significantly increase debt ratios in the absence of fiscal adjustment.
Under the baseline, gross external debt, while increasing, remains sustainable, but is
vulnerable to a large exchange rate shock (Appendix Table I.2). External debt is expected
to rise to 52.4 percent of GDP by 2015 on account of a moderate widening of the current
account deficit, somewhat slower average GDP growth than prior to the crisis, and a gradual
increase in debt-creating inflows, although partly offset by increasing FDI and equity
inflows. Standard tests show the external debt path is robust to a ¼ standard deviation
interest rate shock and increases only moderately (to about 60 percent of GDP) against
comparable shocks to growth or the current account. However, a real depreciation of
30 percent in 2011 would cause gross external debt to increase by almost 30 percent of GDP
by 2013. Nevertheless, a real exchange rate shock of this size would likely precipitate
adjustment in the current account and other second-round effects that would mitigate the
impact on external debt, but which are not captured in a static debt sustainability exercise.
Turkey’s decreasing exposure to the Fund and moderate external debt levels should
ensure adequate capacity to repay the Fund (Appendix Table I.3). Under the baseline
scenario, the exposure to Turkey would decline very rapidly and fall to only SDR1.9 billion
in 2011 (129 percent of new quota, 0.4 percent of GDP, or 3.1 percent of reserves). Annual
debt service to the Fund would remain very small at around 0.3–0.4 percent of GDP.

Appendix Table I.1. Turkey: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15 1/
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2005

2006

2007

Projections
2008

2009 Prel.

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

52.3

46.1

39.4

39.5

45.4

44.1

43.8

42.9

42.1

41.2

40.2

Nonfinancial (NFPS) public sector net debt
Of which: foreign-currency denominated

46.3
17.1

40.0
14.4

34.4
10.9

34.5
11.8

39.4
11.6

38.4
11.3

38.1
10.7

37.3
10.5

36.5
9.7

35.5
8.8

34.5
7.9

Change in NFPS net debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
Of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation
Other identified non-debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Other sources (includes state bank dividends and central bank profits)
Residual 3/

-7.7
-9.2
-5.0
-2.1
-2.2
1.7
-3.9
0.1
-2.1
-0.6
-1.5
1.5

-6.3
-7.6
-4.7
-0.7
-1.6
1.2
-2.7
0.8
-2.2
-1.6
-0.6
1.3

-5.6
-6.2
-3.1
-1.5
0.9
2.6
-1.7
-2.4
-1.5
-0.8
-0.7
0.3

0.1
0.2
-1.6
3.5
0.5
0.7
-0.2
3.0
-1.8
-1.0
-0.7
-0.1

4.8
4.3
1.0
4.4
4.4
2.8
1.6
-0.1
-1.1
-0.2
-1.2
0.5

-1.0
-1.8
0.3
-1.4
-1.4
0.7
-2.1
..
-0.8
-0.4
-0.4
0.9

-0.3
-0.7
-0.2
0.0
0.0
1.3
-1.3
..
-0.6
-0.3
-0.3
0.6

-0.8
-1.1
-0.9
0.4
0.4
1.8
-1.4
..
-0.6
-0.3
-0.2
0.4

-0.9
-1.1
-1.2
0.6
0.6
2.0
-1.4
..
-0.5
-0.3
-0.2
0.4

-1.0
-1.2
-1.2
0.6
0.6
1.9
-1.3
..
-0.5
-0.3
-0.2
0.3

-1.0
-1.0
-1.0
0.4
0.4
1.7
-1.3
..
-0.4
-0.2
-0.2
0.1

6.1
10.9
2.6
-6.0
8.2

3.6
10.1
3.9
-4.4
6.2

3.9
10.7
5.3
-3.5
5.4

4.0
10.5
5.9
-3.0
4.5

4.0
10.2
5.9
-2.4
4.3

4.0
9.5
5.3
-2.4
4.1

39.4
39.4
39.4

37.3
39.4
40.5

35.8
40.5
40.3

34.9
41.9
39.6

34.0
43.6
38.9

33.1
45.3
38.1

32.1
47.0
37.2

B1. Real interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation
B3. Primary balance is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using one-quarter standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011 5/

39.4
39.4
39.4
39.4
39.4

38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4

38.6
39.2
39.1
39.4
43.7

38.6
39.7
39.4
40.1
43.0

38.7
40.1
39.7
40.9
42.4

38.8
40.4
39.9
41.7
41.5

38.9
40.8
40.1
42.5
40.7

C. Tailored Tests
C1. Slow recovery 6/

39.4

38.4

39.2

40.1

41.4

43.2

45.4

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions
Real GDP growth (percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (percent) 4/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, percent)

8.4
11.4
4.3
-0.4
7.1

6.9
12.9
3.5
-5.0
9.3

4.7
13.7
7.5
21.3
6.2

0.7
14.4
2.4
-23.0
12.0

-4.7
13.3
7.9
0.4
5.4

10-Year
Historical
Average

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

3.8
26.6
8.8
-7.0
21.5

5.1
27.2
5.7
21.6
18.4

A. Alternative Scenarios (based on nonfinancial public sector net debt)
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010–15
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010–15
A3. 2010 GDP growth is reduced (relative to baseline) by one standard deviation
B. Bound Tests

1/ The baseline scenario assumes that the government does not save revenue overperformance in 2010 and implements the fiscal rule from 2011 onwards. Bound tests are predicated on the baseline scenario, but do not
include the fiscal adjustment implied by the fiscal rule in response to shocks.
2/ General government debt consistent with the Maastricht definition.
3/ For projections, it includes exchange rate changes.
4/ Calculated as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
5/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
6/ Assumes that real GDP growth is 1.5 percentage points lower each year during 2011-15. The primary surplus is adjusted for the cumulative shortfall in growth (relative to baseline).

47

General government gross debt 2/

48
Appendix Figure I.1. Turkey: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/ 2/
(Net NFPS debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

50

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

40

50

30

45

20

40

Interest
rate shock

10

35

Baseline

50

45

Historical
40

39

40

Baseline
35
35
34
33
30
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

0
2015

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

50

45
Growth
shock

40

50

50

45

45

40

40

35

35

2007

2009

2011

2013

2007

2009

2011

2013

PB shock

30
2015

30
2005

Combined Shock 3/
50

50

45

45

45

Baseline

40

40

35

35

35

2007

2009

2011

2013

Real Depreciation and Contingent
Liabilities Shocks 4/

Contingent
liability shock

2009

2011

2013

50
46
45

Depreciation shock

30
2015

40

Baseline

35
34

34

2007

30
2015

41

Baseline

30
2005

40

43

40

35

40

34

50

Combined
shock

50

45

34

30
2005

30
2015

Primary Deficit Shock (Percent of GDP

41

Baseline

35

30
2005

30
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

30
2015

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes
represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average for
the variable is also shown.
2/ The baseline scenario assumes that the government does not save revenue overperformance in 2010 and implements the fiscal
rule from 2011 onwards. Bound tests are predicated on the baseline scenario, but do not include the fiscal adjustment implied by the
fiscal rule in response to shocks.
3/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
4/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2011, with real depreciation
defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on
GDP deflator).

Appendix Table I.2. Turkey: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

2005

2006

2007

Projections

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

35.2

39.3

38.4

37.9

43.6

41.3

43.4

45.5

47.9

50.2

52.4

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 3/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 4/

-5.8
-6.1
3.6
4.9
21.7
26.6
-3.0
-6.7
1.0
-2.8
-4.9
0.3

4.1
-1.0
4.9
6.3
22.3
28.6
-4.0
-1.9
1.2
-2.2
-0.9
5.1

-0.8
-5.2
4.8
6.6
22.0
28.6
-3.9
-6.1
1.2
-1.5
-5.8
4.4

-0.5
-0.8
4.2
6.6
23.4
30.1
-2.3
-2.7
1.6
-0.2
-4.0
0.3

5.7
7.9
0.6
3.2
22.4
25.6
-1.5
8.7
1.7
2.1
5.0
-2.2

-2.2
0.7
3.4
5.1
22.1
27.2
-1.7
-1.0
1.3
-2.3
...
-2.9

2.1
1.4
3.9
5.8
22.9
28.6
-2.3
-0.2
1.2
-1.4
...
0.7

2.1
1.3
4.1
6.2
23.5
29.7
-2.4
-0.3
1.3
-1.6
...
0.7

2.4
1.3
3.8
6.4
24.3
30.7
-2.5
0.0
1.7
-1.7
...
1.2

2.2
1.1
3.6
6.6
25.0
31.5
-2.7
0.2
2.0
-1.8
...
1.1

2.2
1.1
3.6
6.7
25.6
32.3
-2.7
0.2
2.1
-1.9
...
1.1

162.4

176.0

174.8

161.9

194.9

187.3

189.8

193.3

197.3

200.9

205.0

84.7
17.5

108.1
20.4

121.8
18.8

131.9
18.1

98.0
15.9

119.5
17.0

140.6
19.2

156.1
20.2

174.4
21.5

195.2
22.8

213.3
23.5

41.3

39.6

38.2

37.2

36.3

35.5

6.1
7.8
3.4
12.9
21.4
-3.4
1.7

3.6
0.6
3.1
8.0
9.8
-3.9
2.3

3.9
1.3
3.2
8.2
9.2
-4.1
2.4

4.0
1.2
4.0
8.6
8.5
-3.8
2.5

4.0
1.6
4.4
8.6
8.6
-3.6
2.7

4.0
1.7
4.5
8.2
8.2
-3.6
2.7

External debt-to-exports ratio (percent)
Gross external financing need (billions of U.S. dollars) 5/
Percent of GDP
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 6/

-3.3

49

Baseline: external debt 1/

Debt-stabilizing noninterest current
account 7/

-3.9

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollars (percent change)
Nominal external interest rate (percent)
Growth of exports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Growth of imports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

8.4
13.5
3.1
14.5
19.1
-3.6
3.0

6.9
2.6
3.7
12.9
18.1
-4.9
4.0

4.7
17.2
3.6
20.9
22.5
-4.8
3.9

0.7
11.8
4.6
19.8
18.3
-4.2
2.3

-4.7
-11.5
3.7
-19.6
-28.2
-0.6
1.5

1/ The external debt ratio is calculated by dividing external debt numbers in U.S. dollars based on official Treasury figures by GDP in U.S. dollars calculated by staff using the average exchange rate (consolidated from daily data
published by the CBT).
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, g = real GNP growth rate, e =
nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
3/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-(1+g(1+r1+g++g) times previous period debt stock. increases with an appreciating domestic currency (> 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP
deflator).
4/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
5/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period. Differs slightly from external financing requirement in Staff Report because includes official
transfers and IMF repurchases but excludes increase in portfolio and other investment assets.
6/ The key variables include real GNP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GNP.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels of the last projection
year.

50
Appendix Figure I.2. Turkey: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

80

24

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

70

22

80

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

70

80

Baseline:

3.8

Scenario:

4.3

Historical:

4.0

70

60
Baseline

50

52

20

60

60
i-rate shock 53

18

50

16

40

52

40

Baseline

Historical

35

30
20
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

14
2015

30
2005

Growth Shock (Percent per year)
80

80

70

Baseline:

3.9

Scenario:

1.3

Historical:

3.8

60

Growth
shock

50

70

80

40

2007

2009

2011

70

52

60

60

50

50

40

-3.8

Scenario:

-5.3

2009

2011

2013

30
2015

Combined Shock 2/

80

60

CA shock

Combined
shock

50

59

40

50

40

40

30
2005

90

2007

2009

2011

2007

2009

2011

2013

2013

50

30
2015

Real Depreciation Shock 3/

90
80

30 %
depreciation

78

70

30
2015

50

30
2005

70
60

52
Baseline

40

30
2005

60

40

60
52

Baseline

60

52

80

70

60

70

-1.6

Baseline
40

2007

30
2015

80

Baseline:
Historical:
58

2013

Non-interest Current Account Shock
(Percent of GDP)

Baseline

30
2005

50

2007

2009

2011

2013

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes
represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average
for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2010.

50
40

30
2015

51

52
APPENDIX II: SPILLOVER CHANNELS FROM THE EURO AREA
Direct trade and financial links between Turkey and the most vulnerable euro-area countries
are limited. However, the euro area as a whole is the primary market for Turkish exports and
an important source for direct investment and other capital inflows. Hence, weaker euro area
growth and appreciation of the lira against the euro coupled with depreciation against the
U.S. dollar could significantly worsen Turkey’s trade balance. In addition, a deterioration in
global investor sentiment could, given Turkey historical sensitivity to international
developments, reduce capital flows. On the other hand, Turkey’s improved fundamentals and
favorable growth prospects could instead position Turkey as a regional safe haven, thereby
increasing capital inflows—consistent with developments in recent months.
A. Bank Spillovers
Direct channels of contagion from Turkish subsidiaries of banks headquartered in the
most vulnerable euro-area countries (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain—
hereafter, EA-5) are relatively limited. Four such bank subsidiaries operate in Turkey and
represent about 12 percent of banking sector assets (table below).1 In all cases, and in contrast
to funding models common in Eastern Europe, the Turkish subsidiaries do not depend heavily
on funding from their EA-5 parents, relying instead on domestically sourced deposits (the
average loan-to-deposit ratio is around 95 percent). Therefore, distress in EA-5 parent banks
would be unlikely to have direct system-wide implications in Turkey due to the moderate
market share of the local subsidiaries and their low dependence on parent bank funding.
Financial Position of EA-5 Banks' Subsidiaries in Turkey, March, 2010 (Percent)
Parent Bank Country
Assets / total assets of Turkish banking system
Deposits / total assets of Turkish banking system
Total assets / total assets of parent bank 1/
Deposits/ total deposits of parent bank 1/

Greece

Portugal

Italy

4.1
2.7
7.7
6.6

0.1
0.1
0.6
0.9

8.1
5.1
13.6
15.1

Sources: Bank for International Settlements; Bankscope; and Turkish Banker's Association.
1/ Based on the 2008 balance sheet data of subsidiaries and the consolidated balance sheet of each parent bank.

Other cross-border claims between the EA-5 and Turkey are also small. Direct crossborder lending from EA-5 bank headquarters directly to Turkish residents (not intermediated
through a Turkish bank subsidiary) amounts to about $7.1 billion (only about 1 percent of the

1

The smallest of these is in the process of being bought out by domestic capital.

53
Turkish banking assets) (table below).2 Similarly, consolidated claims of Turkish banks on EA5 residents, which include sovereign bonds and equities in addition to bank loans, are negligible
(around US$ 1 billion).3
BIS Foreign Claims by Nationality of Reporting Banks, December, 2009 (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Creditor/Debtor Country
Consolidated foreign claims of BIS reporting
banks on Turkey 1/
Of which: direct cross-border lending 1/ 2/
Consolidated foreign claims of Turkish BIS
reporting banks 1/

Greece

Ireland

Italy 3/

Portugal

Spain

Rest of Euro
Area

25.2

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.4

64.3

6.4

0.0

0.0

0.3

0.4

27.2

0.4

0.1

0.6

0.0

0.0

12.0

Sources: Bank for International Settlements; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Based on June 2010 BIS consolidated foreign claims data vintage.
2/ Calculated by subtracting the loans and domestic government securities of the respective subsidiaries and branches in
Turkey from total foreign claims.
3/ Unicredit does not have the majority share of Yapi ve Kredi Bankasi, so the latter claims on the Turkish economy are not
included in BIS data.

The broad range of financial transactions between euro area banks and Turkish banks
pose an important source of contagion. Banks from other euro-area countries have only five
relatively small subsidiaries in Turkey that represent, as a group, about 8 percent of the Turkish
banking sector assets, while claims of Turkish banks on the rest of the euro-area (EA) are only
US$12 billion. However, the Turkish banking sector is dependent on other EA banks as an
important source for syndicated loans, currency swaps, and trade credit. Hence, impairment of
other EA banks could have a significant impact on the funding of Turkish banks. Moreover,
other EA banks provide a larger amount of credit directly to the Turkish economy (about
US$30 billion).

2

The BIS total foreign claims data (on the immediate borrower’s basis) includes direct cross-border claims of
foreign banks and claims of their foreign affiliates—subsidiaries and branches. To isolate direct cross-border
claims, loans issued and government securities held by subsidiaries and branches are deducted from the total
foreign claims.
3

According to the CBT, its holdings of euro-area government bonds are well diversified and it does not hold any
significant amounts of EA-5 sovereign debt.

54
B. Sovereign Risk Contagion
The sensitivity of Turkish financial markets to global risk appetite appears to have
declined during the EA-5 sovereign debt crisis, with Turkey performing better than
emerging markets in general. Turkish sovereign CDS spreads—which historically have been
very responsive to global risk sentiment—appear to have decoupled from EA-5 CDS spreads
since late 2009. In addition, Turkish equities have outpaced most regional EM averages in
recent months. These developments may
reflect the strength of the ongoing recovery in
the Turkish economy, its resilience during
the 2008-09 crisis, and stronger fundamentals
than some EA countries. As a result,
nonresidents have increased their share of
Turkish government bonds (from 8.5 percent in
February 2010 to 10.6 percent in May 2010,
equivalent to about US$ 5 billion), while
retaining their 65 percent share of equity
holdings. However, the decoupling has not
been complete, since more permanent inflows
(e.g., FDI) have not yet recovered and the lira
weakened somewhat against the US dollar (but strengthened against the euro) in May 2010.
While too early to predict with confidence, it is possible that, going forward, Turkey could be
perceived as a regional a safe haven.

55
C. Trade Spillovers
Although direct trade channels with the EA-5 are limited, the euro area is Turkey’s
main trading partner. The EA-5 accounts for
around 10 percent of Turkey’s total exports,
with Italy accounting for 6 percentage points.
Nevertheless, the euro area as a whole absorbs
32 percent of Turkish exports, with Germany
the largest export market at almost 15 percent.
Although penetration of new markets (notably
North Africa, Russia, and other fuel-exporting
countries) has risen over time, it is unlikely
demand from these countries could ramp up
quickly to compensate for a potential protracted
period of low demand in the euro area,
especially in view of the types of products sold
to the EA.
Weak demand from EU could imply considerable excess capacity in some of Turkey’s
key sectors. Exports to the EA are concentrated in the textile/apparel and vehicle sectors,
with the EA-5 absorbing 15 percent and
18 percent, respectively, of total sector
exports, with the rest of the euro area
collectively absorbing around 50–60 percent.
The exposure of metal manufacturers to the
EA-5 is instead limited, accounting for only
5 percent of total sector exports (although
around 30 percent for the euro area as a
whole). Due to the highly cyclical nature of
demand, the vehicle sector stands to be among
the most affected by slow growth in the euro
area, as evidenced during the 2008–09 crisis.

56

D. Exchange rate effects
Appreciation of the Turkish lira against the euro, combined with depreciation relative
to the U.S. dollar would affect Turkey through several channels. Since the beginning of
the year, the lira has strengthened by more
than 10 percent against the euro, but
depreciated by 4 percent against the US
dollar.
Trade channel
Turkey’s bilateral trade balance with the
EA is likely to worsen as a result of cross
exchange rate movements, but the impact
on the overall trade balance is more
uncertain. Turkey’s external trade is
denominated mostly in euros and U.S. dollars.
The effect of a change in the bilateral euro-lira and dollar-lira exchange rate on the trade
balance depends on the elasticity of imports and exports to the exchange rate, the initial trade
balance in each currency, and the size of the individual bilateral exchange rate movements.

57

Effect of the Exchange Rate on the Trade Balance
The trade balance denominated in lira of goods exchanged in currency i (TBi) is defined as:
TBi ≡ Xi – eiMi, i = €, $

(1)

where TBi and exports (Xi) are denominated in lira (for convenience as numeraire), imports (Mi) are
denominated in foreign currency i, the exchange rate (ei) is expressed as lira per unit of foreign
currency (hence, an increase is a lira depreciation), and prices of exports and imports are normalized
to unity.1 The total trade balance is therefore the sum of the euro and dollar trade balances.
Differentiating (1) with respect to ei, and multiplying by ei/Xi gives the condition that a depreciation
improves the trade balance if:
ηX,ei Xi/(eiMi) + │ηM,ei │> 1 . (2)
Therefore, the effect of a change in the exchange rate on the trade balance depends on the elasticity of
exports and imports with respect to the exchange rate (ηQ,ei, Q = X, M, and where ηM,ei is negative),
and the initial ratio of exports to imports to currency area i. A depreciation is more likely to improve
the trade balance when exports and imports (the latter in absolute terms) are more responsive to the
exchange rate, and the more positive is the bilateral trade balance.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1

For simplicity, it is assumed that trade in currency i is not affected by a change in exchange rate j, consistent with
specialization of imports and exports. It is also assumed all else is unchanged, therefore abstracting from changes in GDP
growth rates that may accompany shifts in bilateral exchange rates.

Turkey’s bilateral trade balance with the EA is expected to worsen if the lira
appreciates against the euro. Turkey’s euro-denominated trade is currently close to
balance, so the unweighted sum of the elasticities will determine the effect on the trade
balance (the Marshall-Lerner (ML) condition). It is reasonable to expect that eurodenominated trade is fairly responsive to the exchange rate since exports to the EA are
primarily manufactured goods that can be readily sourced from other countries (including
from the European Union), while imports from the EA are a mix of intermediates used in the
production of exports (and hence whose import elasticity is linked to the elasticity of final
export demand) and a wide variety of consumer goods, the demand for which is likely to be
price elastic.
The effect of a depreciation relative to the US dollar on Turkey’s dollar-denominated
trade balance is less clear. Dollar-denominated exports are only half of dollar-denominated
imports, thereby dampening the effect of the export elasticity. In addition, more than
30 percent of Turkey’s dollar-denominated imports are energy products, which—given the
high energy intensity of Turkish GDP and dependence on imported energy—are not likely to

58
be very sensitive to changes in price. Hence, the “standard” result that a depreciation
improves the trade balance may not hold in the case of the US dollar-denominated trade.
The net effect on Turkey’s overall trade balance will also depend on the relative shift in
the lira against the euro and the dollar. In recent weeks, the lira has tended to appreciate
by more relative to the euro than it has depreciated relative to the dollar. This pattern of
exchange rate movements makes it more likely that Turkey’s trade balance would deteriorate
as a result of shifts in the cross euro-dollar exchange rate.

59
Financial channel
The financial channel may also be significant, but relevant data is very limited. While
Turkish households are long in FX and Turkish corporates hold short FX positions, the
foreign-currency denomination of their balance sheets is unknown. Based on a sample of 43
large companies, Finans Invest concludes that a 15 percent weakening of the euro against the
U.S. dollar and a 5 percent depreciation of the lira against the dollar would result in small
losses in non-operating income, but with considerable variation across firms.

60
Appendix Table II.1. Financial Position of European Banks' Subsidiaries in Turkey
Origin of Bank Subsidiary in Turkey

Euro Area
Banks

EA5

Balance sheet items
Total assets
Of which:
Cash
Government securities
Loans
Total liabilities
Of which:
Deposits
Funds borrowed
Shareholders' equity

Total Banking
System 1/

(Billions of U.S. dollars)
66.8

111.1

543.4

4.3
15.0
40.8

7.6
23.4
69.4

27.2
191.4
266.8

66.8

111.1

543.4

43.1
5.3
8.7

67.7
13.3
14.5

348.9
48.0
74.0

Key ratios

(Percent)

Balance sheet
Loans / total assets
Government securities / total assets
Loan / deposits ratio
Funds borrowed / total assets

61.1
22.5
94.7
7.9

62.4
21.0
102.5
12.0

49.1
35.2
76.5
8.8

FX exposure 2/
FX loans / total loans
FX deposits / total deposits
FX funds borrowed / total funds borrowed

26.7
38.9
83.5

24.0
37.9
81.9

28.4
32.9
82.1

6.3
1.2

5.8
1.5

5.0
0.9

Capital ratios 2/
Capital adequacy ratio
Shareholders' equity / total assets

17.3
13.1

17.3
13.1

20.2
13.6

Profitability and liquidity ratio 2/
Net profit / total assets
Net profits / total shareholders' equity
Liquid assets / total assets

0.8
5.9
19.2

0.6
4.8
23.0

0.7
5.4
33.2

12.3
7.9
5.6
12.9
12.8

20.5
12.5
8.8
8.5
10.2

…
…
…
…
…

Quality of loans 2/
NPL (gross)
Net NPLs (after provisioning)

Memorandum items:
Assets / total assets of Turkish banking system
Deposits / total assets of Turkish banking system
Bond holdings / total bond holdings of Turkish banking system
Assets / total assets of parent bank 1/ 3/
Deposits / total deposits of parent bank 1/ 3/
Sources: Turkish Banker's Association; BRSA; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Deposit money banks.
2/ For EA5 countries or Euro area, average regional ratios are calculated by weighing individual bank ratio by
asset size.
3/ Based on the 2008 consolidated balance sheet of each parent bank.

61
APPENDIX III. TURKEY’S NEW FISCAL RULE
The Turkish government is in the process of adopting a fiscal rule. The rule should help
promote sustainable, countercyclical fiscal policy and will be accompanied by some
improvements in the public financial management framework. However, success will require
strong ownership and vigorous implementation.
The proposed rule
The Turkish government has announced plans to implement a fiscal rule from 2011.
The rule establishes a medium-term overall deficit target of 1 percent of GDP for the general
government. It then sets minimum reductions (or maximum increases) in the deficit each year
that are consistent with converging to the medium-term deficit target over time.
Algebraically, the rule is of the form:
∆d= a(d-1-d*) + b(g-g*)
where
∆d = the ceiling on the change in the overall deficit (as a percent of GDP) in the current year;
a = the convergence coefficient (a negative fraction between 0 and 1);
d-1 = the overall deficit in the previous year (in percent of GDP);
d* = the medium-term deficit target (in percent of GDP);
b = the cyclicality coefficient (a negative fraction reflecting the desired sensitivity of the
deficit to the cycle);
g = real GDP growth in the current year (in percent); and
g* = assumed average long-run real GDP growth (in percent).
The ceiling on the annual change in the deficit (∆d) is the sum of two terms: The first term,
a(d-1-d*), calls for reducing a fraction (a) of the difference between the previous year’s
deficit and the medium-term deficit target. The second term, b(g-g*), accommodates the
economic cycle, with higher growth requiring more adjustment and lower growth requiring
less adjustment. The rule sets a ceiling on the change in the deficit—fiscal policy may be
tighter than prescribed by the rule if economic conditions (such as financing or current
account considerations) so require.
The variables d*, g*, a, and b will be fixed by legislation. Specifically, the draft fiscal rule
legislation (which is currently in parliament) sets the medium-term deficit target (d*) = 1;
assumed average long-run growth (g*) = 5; the convergence coefficient (a) = -0.33; and the
cyclicality coefficient (b) = -0.33:
∆d= -0.33(d-1-1) - 0.33(g-5)

62
While the average growth rate of 5 percent is optimistic, this is balanced by the relatively
prudent medium-term deficit target of 1 percent of GDP. This reflects the algebraic
equivalence between different combinations of d* and g*. For example, if growth actually
averages 4 percent (consistent with staff’s medium-term projection), the deficit will converge
to 2 percent, rather than the targeted 1 percent of GDP. Nonetheless, a 2 percent deficit
should still ensure low debt levels over time.1 The convergence coefficient of -0.33 implies
that a third of the difference between last year’s deficit and the medium-term target of
1 percent of GDP must be eliminated each year. The cyclical coefficient of -0.33 allows full
operation of automatic stabilizers and some modest discretionary countercyclical policy,
since general government revenue is slightly below 33 percent of GDP and the elasticity of
revenue with respect to GDP is thought to be 1 or less (given the high reliance on petroleum
and tobacco excises, which are not highly cyclical).
One way to view the rule is that it essentially establishes a minimum amount of
structural adjustment each year, which in turn is a function of how far the overall
deficit is from its medium-term target. To see this, note that if g* equals potential growth,
then the percentage change in the output gap in the current year can be approximated by (gg*). If the coefficient b is set just to reflect automatic stabilizers, then the structural
adjustment in any given year is the following:2
Structural adjustment in current year = -∆d + b(g-g*)
Re-arranging the rule, one can see that the required amount of structural adjustment each
year is a function of how far the headline deficit is from its medium-term target:
Structural adjustment in current year = -∆d + b(g-g*) = -a(d-1-d*)

1

Specifically, a 2 percent of GDP deficit should cause debt to converge (very slowly) to roughly 25 percent of
GDP in the very long run if nominal GDP growth averages 8 percent. To see this, note that the continuous time
relationship between debt and the deficit is given by ∆D = d – Dy, where D and ∆D are the debt ratio and its
change, d is the overall deficit ratio, and y is the nominal GDP growth rate. Therefore, as D rises, ∆D falls and
vice-versa, so any fixed overall deficit target and fixed nominal GDP growth rate, y, causes debt to converge to
a specific level. The long-run debt ratio is obtained by setting ∆D =0, yielding D = d/y.

2

This leaves aside the issue of one-off fiscal effects, so that “structural adjustment” is equal to the change in the
cyclically adjusted balance.

63
Desirable properties of this type of rule include the following:


it is countercyclical;



it applies symmetrically to both revenue and spending (unlike spending rules),
limiting opportunities for revenue loopholes and promoting strong revenue collection;



it does not require explicit estimation of the level of the output gap; this is desirable
because the level of the output gap is quite uncertain and subject to large revisions;



it is relatively simple for a structural balance-type rule; and



it allows gradual adjustment when the deficit is away from its medium-term target; as
a result, the amount of required adjustment in any given year should always be
feasible, making the rule more politically durable.

Stress tests
To illustrate how the proposed rule behaves under different macroeconomic conditions,
it is stress tested using five scenarios (see box). The simulations assume the rule takes
effect in 2011 and that the macroeconomic scenarios diverge starting in 2012. The results of
the simulations are shown in Appendix Figure III.1. In general, the rule behaves
appropriately in response to the wide range of scenarios and shocks considered:


In the baseline scenario (with long-run growth assumed to be 4 percent), the overall
deficit converges to 2 percent of GDP, and debt falls gradually to 38 percent of GDP
by 2020. In all scenarios, debt stays contained below 50 percent of GDP by 2020,
including in the low growth scenario.



Fiscal effort—defined as the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance—
remains feasible at little more than 1 percentage point of GDP in a single year, except
in the initial years of the large shock and contingent liability scenarios, when the rule
requires somewhat more adjustment to offset the significant increase in interest
payments in these scenarios. Since the large shock scenario describes the “financing
crunch” shocks that emerging markets have experienced in the past (i.e., when
recession and depreciation coincides with sharply rising borrowing costs), tighter
fiscal policy as required by the rule may be appropriate in such cases.



However, if the rule is successful, Turkey may instead experience cycles as described
by the boom-bust scenario in which interest rates fall during the bust (as occurred
during the recent crisis and is common in advanced economies). In this scenario, the
rule requires large primary surpluses during the boom, thereby creating space for a
substantial stimulus (negative fiscal effort) of around 1.5 percent of GDP in the year
output drops by 5 percent and with the primary surplus falling from over 3 percent of
GDP at the peak of the boom to -2 percent of GDP at the trough of the cycle.

64
Stress Test Scenarios
The following five stress test scenarios are used to simulate the fiscal rule:

Baseline scenario: Staff’s baseline scenario.
Large shock scenario: In this shock: (i) real GDP growth falls to -3 percent in 2012 and
0.5 percent in 2013; (ii) the exchange rate depreciates 20 percent above the baseline in 2012;
and (iii) domestic and external borrowing costs rise by 5 and 2 percentage points,
respectively, in 2012. The shock then dissipates in subsequent years (i.e., growth rates,
interest rates, and the exchange rate level gradually return to baseline). This scenario
illustrates how the rule responds to a combined shock to growth, interest rates, and the
exchange rate.
Low growth scenario: Growth remains 1 percentage point below the baseline scenario
indefinitely, starting in 2012.
Contingent liability shock scenario: Government debt is assumed to suddenly increase by
15 percentage points of GDP in 2012 (e.g., due to a call on guarantees).
Boom-bust scenario: Real growth is assumed to reach 7 percent during 2012 to 2015, and
then collapse to -5 percent in 2016, after which it recovers gradually. Interest rates are
assumed to be 2 percentage points higher than the baseline during the boom (2012-2015) and
3, 2, and 1 percentage points lower than the baseline during the first, second, and third year
of bust, respectively.
Real GDP Growth Rates in Stress Test Scenarios, 2010–20
(Percent)

Baseline
Large shock scenario
Low growth scenario
Contingent liability scenario
Boom-bust scenario
Source: IMF staff calculations.

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

6.1
6.1
6.1
6.1
6.1

3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6

3.9
-3.0
2.9
3.9
7.0

4.0
0.5
3.0
4.0
7.0

4.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
7.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
7.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
-5.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
0.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
3.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
4.0

65

Operationalizing the rule
The deficit ceilings set by the rule would apply both ex ante during the budget
preparation process and ex post to the final outturn. A Medium-Term Program (MTP)
projecting the main fiscal variables for the next three years will be published by June 15 of
each year. Deficit targets in the MTP must be consistent with ceilings established by the rule,
and a preliminary budget for the following year would be prepared on this basis. In October,
the budget would be submitted to parliament, with any required revisions to the deficit target
based on updated projections for the following year’s growth and the projected deficit for the
current year. During the budget year, the Economic Coordination Council would be required
to submit proposed adjustment measures for cabinet’s consideration in the event a violation
of the rule is projected. Final performance against the rule would be judged based on the

66
actual deficit outturn and the deficit ceiling as determined by the rule, using the actual growth
outturn and the actual deficit outturn in the previous year.
Sanctions would be reputational. To strengthen reputational considerations and facilitate
monitoring, the Ministry of Finance would publish quarterly fiscal monitoring reports. The
Minister of Finance and Minister in charge of the State Planning Office would also be
required to appear before parliament’s Budget and Planning Committee at mid-year to report
on compliance with the rule in the previous year, reasons for any deviations, and the outlook
for compliance in the current year.
The draft fiscal rule legislation makes several improvements to Turkey’s public
financial management framework. Of note, it (i) requires the Minister in charge of the
Treasury to co-approve domestic borrowing by local governments that exceeds 10 percent of
annual revenue (along with the Ministry of Interior, which currently makes such approvals);
(ii) reduces the ability to spend beyond budgeted levels from various privatization receipts;
(iii) requires annual publication of long-run actuarial analyses of the pension and healthcare
systems; (iv) bans off-budget offsetting of debts and receivables; and (v) strengthens
monitoring of arrears. The law also establishes a balanced budget requirement for the state
enterprise sector as a whole.
The rule’s success could be further promoted by adopting additional public financial
management reforms. Particularly useful would be mechanisms to encourage prudent
budgeting, ensure timely implementation of within-year deficit-reducing measures when
needed, and strengthen fiscal coordination between central and local governments.
Above all, the rule’s success will depend on strong ownership and vigorous
implementation.

Appendix IV: Current Status of Main Recommendations from the 2007 FSAP
Main Area

Action Taken1

Specific Recommendations
Banking

Implementation of banking law

Review and amend procedures for
handling failing banks

Implement all regulations of the new
banking law. Develop and implement a
comprehensive plan for the BRSA to
supervise banks in line with new legal and
regulatory framework, including risk
management.
Reduce legal uncertainty that could cause
disruptive court challenges.

All the sub-regulations issued pursuant to the banking law are in
effect and executed on a continuous basis.

Eliminate the need for a supermajority on
the banking supervisory board to transfer
control of a failed bank to the SDIF.

BRSA believes that the need for a supermajority to transfer
control of a failed bank to the SDIF is essential for such an
important action. The supermajority is also required for the
establishment of a bank in Turkey.

The procedures related to handling problem banks are given
explicitly in Banking Law articles 67–71.

Ensure active involvement of all relevant
agencies to promote timely and costeffective action (e.g., by including SDIF
into contingency planning).

1

According to article 100 of the Banking Law, the Coordination
Committee (including SDIF) convenes once every three months,
exchanges information on the banking sector, and discusses
measures to be taken as a result of the supervision of deposit
banks. Moreover, issues related to contingency planning are
evaluated by a Systemic Risk Coordination Committee.

Prepared by the authorities. Staff’s full assessment will occur in the context of the 2011 FSAP update.

67

Shorten the period an intervened bank
may be kept open.

Amend the legislation to allow the BRSA
to be fully responsible for managing its
expenditures budget without consulting
the relevant Minister and, in general, any
interference from the government. The
BRSA should have the final decision on
all technical issues related to its relevant
sub-regulations.

No progress since the last FSAP report.

Conclude Memoranda of
Understanding (MoUs) with
remaining significant foreign
supervision counterparties

The BRSA should develop informal or
formal arrangements with foreign
supervisors (particularly with countries
where Turkish banks have material
presence or with the home countries of
banks with a major presence in Turkey) to
ensure ongoing cooperation and
information sharing.

The BRSA has signed MoUs with 13 out of 26 countries where
Turkish banks have presence (i.e., subsidiaries, jointlycontrolled undertakings, branches, and representative offices).
The BRSA will finalize negotiations with the relevant
supervisory authorities once the banking law is amended to
introduce confidentiality provisions necessary to comply with
some foreign supervisors’ rules.

Prudential norms

Ensure FX-indexed loans are subject to
similar constraints as FX loans.

Need no longer arises since FX-indexed loans to consumers are
now prohibited.

Data management

To support enhanced supervisory practice,
the authorities need to make better use of
the information that is already available,
and, as needed, selectively gather new
types of information (e.g., on portfolio
duration, corporate and household
financial indicators, and dealings in
derivatives).

To deepen the supervisory practices, consolidated supervision
and financial data gathering have been paid special attention. In
this context, for instance, to improve the off-site monitoring
function, the Supervision IV Department was established in
September 2008 to produce and report analyses on a
consolidated basis. Daily information is obtained from banks
and is regularly analyzed. Legislation on IT reporting systems
for supervision is complete, and new supervision guidelines are
being prepared. Supervision program for the year 2010 was
formed in accordance with the guidelines.

68

Review mechanisms to ensure
financial independence of
supervisory agencies

Privatization

Complete privatization of state banks.

In the Medium-Term Program, the government has announced
that preparation studies for public offerings of some shares of
Ziraat Bank will be started; decisions regarding implementation
will be made by taking into account progress and market
conditions.

Taxation

Phase out transaction taxes: Banking and
Insurance Transaction Tax (BITT) and
Resource Utilization Support Fund
(RUSF)

BITT on housing finance and investment fund transactions have
been exempted. BITT rate has been reduced from 5 to 1 percent
for purchases/sales of T-bills issued by CBT or securities
acquired or sold by some public administrations (e.g., housing
development administration or privatization agency). RUSF rate
on consumer loans provided by banks and financial institutions
was reduced from 15 to 10 percent.

Households and insurance sectors
Complete and implement regulations
associated with the new laws. Establish
prudential norms for mortgage lending,
and assign related oversight
responsibilities.

New mortgage and insurance law passed. Bylaw on Insurance
Related Individual Credits was published on January 17, 2009.
General Conditions for Payment Protection Insurance are in
effect since February 2008 to protect debtors’ installments to
creditor against unemployment and incapability risks.

Data provision

Establish mechanisms to generate more
reliable data on insurance companies’
provisions and capital.

Legislation setting the rules for the calculation of “Capital
Adequacy of Insurance, Reinsurance, and Pension Companies”
has been adopted.

Capital Markets
Resolve problems regarding
privatization of the ISE

Remove ISE status as a government
agency by privatizing it, allowing ISE
governance to be competitive and cost
effective.

Amendment in the Capital Markets Law needs to be made by
December 31, 2010. (Depending on Parliament Schedule)

69

Mortgage and insurance law

Capital markets law

Adopt a capital Markets Law in 2008.
Key regulatory issues relate to the
treatment of market conduct of large
shareholders and corporate governance in
publicly owned companies.

Amendment in the Capital Markets Law needs to be made by
December 31, 2010. (Depending on Parliament Schedule) 2

The current system for valuing illiquid
assets needs to be improved.
Corporate Governance
Encourage market participation

Strengthen minority shareholders’
protection and raise board members’
accountability.

New communique requiring independent review/valuation for
related party transactions that meet specific criteria (e.g. the
amount of transactions exceeds a threshold) was adopted
in 2008.

Accounting and auditing
standards

2

Further strengthen accounting and
auditing, especially in smaller
nonfinancial firms (and non-listed firms).

Small and non-listed firms would be harmonized with
internationally accepted accounting standards. (Depending on
Parliament Schedule). 3

The recent financial architecture is going to change in the near future and the new Capital Markets Law has to take into consideration all these changes in its
pertinent part.
3
The financial architecture is going to be altered significantly and thus these changes may require corresponding changes in accounting and auditing standards.

70

The ongoing project on reviewing and amending corporate
governance principles according to international developments
(including the European Commission’s recommendations on
remuneration of directors of listed companies) is expected to be
finalized by end-2010.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
TURKEY
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring—
Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department
July 13, 2010

Contents

Page

Annexes
I.

Fund Relations ...............................................................................................................2

II.

World Bank Relations ....................................................................................................5

II.

Statistical Issues .............................................................................................................7

2
ANNEX I: FUND RELATIONS
A three-year SDR 6.7 billion (559 percent of quota) Stand-By Arrangement was
approved in May 2005 and expired on May 10, 2008. Cumulative purchases amounted
to SDR 6.7 billion. The Board concluded an Ex-Post Assessment of Longer-Term
Program Engagement and Ex-Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access for Turkey on
August 1, 2008 (SM/08/248). In September 2008, the Fund initiated Post-Program
Monitoring (which was temporarily suspended during subsequent discussions on a
possible new Fund-supported program). Outstanding Fund credit amounted to
SDR 4.8 billion (407 percent of quota) as of May 31, 2010.
The 2010 Article IV and Post-Program Monitoring Discussions were held in Ankara
and Istanbul during May 12–26, 2010. The staff team comprised Ms. van Elkan (Head,
EUR), Messrs. Cerutti, Fletcher, and Mati (all EUR), Mr. Tyson (FAD), Mmes. Goretti
(SPR) and Mitchell-Casselle (MCM), and Mr. Lombardo (Res. Rep). Mr. Demirkol
(Advisor, OED) joined the meetings. Mr. Kiekens (Executive Director) attended the
concluding meeting.
Data provision to the Fund is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, despite
certain shortcomings. Turkey subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard.
(Data as of May 31, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Turkey became a member of the Fund on March 11, 1947. It
has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 as of
March 22, 1990.

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

Millions of SDRs
1,191.30
5,929.33
112.78

Percent of Quota
100.00
497.72
9.47

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

Millions of SDRs
1,071.33
969.75

Percent of Allocation
100.00
90.52

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-By Arrangements

Millions of SDRs
4,850.80

Percent of Quota
407.19

3

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type
Approval
Date
Stand-By
Stand-By
Stand-By
Of which: SRF

VI.

05/11/05
02/04/02
12/22/99
12/21/00

Expiration
Date
05/10/08
02/03/05
02/04/02
12/20/01

Amount
Amount
Approved
Drawn
In millions of SDRs
6,662.04
6,662.04
12,821.20
11,914.00
15,038.40
11,738.96
5,784.00
5,784.00

Projected Payments to Fund 1/:
(In millions of SDRs; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

1,197.09

1,780.01

1,311.59

562.11

37.83

40.77

17.79

3.26

0.26

1,234.91

1,820.78

1,329.28

565.37

0.26

1/

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of
such arrears will be shown in this section.

VII.

Safeguard Assessments:
An assessment of the central bank’s safeguards framework was conducted under the
previous SBA and completed on June 29, 2005. While it uncovered no material
weaknesses in the central bank’s safeguard framework, a few recommendations were
made to address some remaining vulnerabilities in the areas of internal audit and
controls. Those recommendations have been implemented.

VIII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:
Since February 22, 2001, the lira has been under an independent floating exchange
rate regime.

IX.

Article IV Consultations:
The last Article IV staff report (SM/07/151) was issued on May 4, 2007, and the
accompanying Selected Issues paper (SM/07/154 and EBS/07/48) was issued on
May 7, 2007. Board discussion took place on May 18, 2007.

4

X.

XI.

ROSCs
Standard or Code Assessed
Fiscal Transparency
Corporate Governance
Data ROSC
Fiscal ROSC
Fiscal ROSC
FSSA and related ROSCs
Data ROSC

Date of Issuance
Document Number
June 26, 2000
n/a
December 11, 2000 prepared by the World Bank
March 14, 2002
Country Report No. 02/55
November 25, 2003 Country Report No. 03/363
March 24, 2006
Country Report No. 06/126
May 7, 2007
Country Report No. 07/361
September 3, 2009
Country Report No 09/286

Recent Technical Assistance:
Dept.
FAD/MFD
MFD
ICM
FAD
FAD
FAD
STA
STA

Timing
Feb. 05

Purpose
Treasury cash management and state bank
reform
2005–06 (several
Inflation targeting and monetary policy
missions)
implementation
May 05
Investor relations office
July 05
Income tax reform
2005–08 (numerous Revenue administration reforms
missions)
Feb. 07
Health spending
June 07 and Nov. 07 Revision of national accounts statistics and
communication strategy
Nov. 3-17, 2008
DATA ROSC

5
ANNEX II. WORLD BANK RELATIONS1
1.
Turkey and the World Bank Group have a strong partnership, which
continuously deepened over the last ten years. Economic growth, which averaged
6.8 percent annually between 2002 and 2007, slowed in 2008. As the global financial crisis
and economic downturn hit Turkey’s real economy hard in 2008 and 2009, the World Bank
Group responded flexibly and quickly by (1) increasing new International Bank of
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financing, to US$2.1 billion in FY09 and US$3
billion in FY10, and (2) re-focusing the program on addressing the impact of the crisis, in
particular access to credit and jobs, while also (3) expanding the program on energy security
and efficiency, clean and renewable energy, environmental management, and climate change
as a long-term strategic priorities, in line with Turkey’s rise as a regional and global player.
Both the IBRD and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) accelerated and expanded
financing to the private sector, including Small and Medium Enterprises, which generate the
bulk of employment in Turkey and have been heavily credit constrained during the crisis.
These adjustments to the current FY08–11 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) are reflected
in the CPS Progress Report (January 2010).
2.
Turkey is among the IBRD’s largest borrowers and ranks fifth as of June 2010 in
terms of exposure with US$ 10.2 billion in loans outstanding, representing 8.2 percent
of the IBRD portfolio. The current CPS FY08–11 IBRD is expected to provide up to US$
8.1 billion financing of which up to US$ 6.3 billion financing has already been delivered in
the first three fiscal years. In the last year under the current CPS, IBRD plans to commit up to
US$ 1.8 billion. Turkey’s active portfolio comprises 18 projects with a total commitment of
US$ 5.7 billion (June 2010) which performs well and is improving with a continuing trend
towards fewer, larger operations.
3.
IFC’s new commitments reached US$351 million in FY09 and US$401 million in
FY10. IFC has supported infrastructure projects and investments by existing clients with a
focus on improving competitiveness, energy efficiency and clean production. IFC continued
providing trade and medium-term finance to local banks and supporting Turkish companies
investing outside of Turkey (from Latin America to Russia and MENA).
4.
The World Bank Group is engaged in Turkey with its full range of financing as
well as analytic, knowledge, and advisory services. Recent analytic, knowledge, and
advisory activities have included assessments of the economic and social impact of the crisis
and policies and programs to mitigate it and promote growth recovery, Country Economic
Memorandum on informality and on savings and growth, a programmatic Public Expenditure
Review, studies of female labor force participation, the inequality of opportunities, the

1

Prepared by World Bank staff.

6
quality of education, an investment climate assessment, and technical assistance on food
safety, sustainable development, watershed management.
5.
Much analytic and advisory work is carried out together with the Turkish
authorities, the private sector, academia, or civil society stakeholders. The World Bank
Group engages with civil society in the preparation and implementation of projects and
collaborates closely with other development partners such as the IMF, EU, United Nations
organizations, and key bilateral partners.

7
ANNEX III. STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
Data provision to the Fund is broadly adequate for surveillance and program
monitoring purposes, despite certain shortcomings. Turkey subscribes to the Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS).
Real sector statistics
2.
Data on producer and consumer prices are published monthly, with a very short
lag. Monthly data on industrial production are published with a lag of five to six weeks.
The CPI and the PPI generally conform to international standards. The methodology of the
CPI was improved in 2009, and a new CPI was compiled. The new CPI does not cover
owner-occupied housing, commodities produced by households for own consumption, and
expenditures on commodities obtained through in-kind payments. The PPI is compiled only
by product (and not by economic activity).
3.
Quarterly national accounts are published with a 2-3 month lag. The Turkish
Statistical Institute (Turkstat) publishes national accounts in current and constant prices for
the production and expenditure approaches to gross domestic product (GDP) and in current
prices for the income approach. The national accounts are compiled in accordance with the
1993 System of National Accounts (1993 SNA) methodology.
4.
In March 2008, revised annual and quarterly estimates were released for 1998
onwards following the introduction of ESA 1995 in Turkish National Accounts. The new
national accounts data implement the main recommendations from the 2001 Data Module of
the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (Data ROSC): (i) improved estimation
and deflation of output and household consumption; (ii) disaggregated deflation of trade in
services and inclusion of shuttle trade in exports of goods; and (iii) improvement in the
estimation of selected aggregates. However, GDP time series have not been constructed for
years prior to 1998. Work is underway aiming at incorporation of data from annual
collections, the development of independent estimates of household consumption, and further
enhancement of estimates for the non-observed economy. A project recently initiated aims at
extending the scope of the accounts to a full sequence of accounts for the total economy,
annual supply and use tables, and institutional sector accounts.
5.
There is a wide range of data on labor market developments, with the biannual
Household Labor Force Survey (HLFS) replaced with a monthly survey at the
beginning of 2000. These new data are published quarterly with a three month lag. Coverage
of wage developments in the private sector has improved through the use of quarterly surveys
of the manufacturing sector.

8
Government finance statistics
6.
Budgetary data are published monthly, with a lag of some 2−3 weeks. Coverage
of the budget is incomplete, with some fiscal operations conducted through extra budgetary
funds, for which data are available only with long lags. Fiscal analysis is further complicated
by the omission of certain transactions from the fiscal accounts, some quasi-fiscal operations
carried out by state banks and state economic enterprises (SEEs); and technical problems
associated with consolidating the cash-based accounts of governmental entities with the
accrual-based accounting of SEEs. It is difficult to reconcile fiscal data with monetary and
BOP data, especially in the accounting of external debt flows and central government
deposits.
7.
Turkey reports fiscal data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook. The latest data available are for 2008 and cover the central government budgetary
sector (including annex budget units). Data are not provided for social security units or local
government. Monthly data are being reported for publication in International Financial
Statistics, starting from September 2009.
Monetary and financial statistics
8.
Data on the central bank balance sheet, and provisional data on the main
monetary aggregates and total domestic credit, are published weekly, with a one- and
two-week lag, respectively. Data on the monetary survey and deposit interest rates are
published monthly, with about a two-to-three-month lag. The CBT does not expect to meet
the SDDS timeliness requirement for the analytical accounts of the banking sector in the
short term due to delays in the preparation of year-end bank balance sheets. The CBT reports
to STA the Standardized Report Form (SRF) 1SR for the Central Bank on a monthly basis
with a two-week lag and SRF 2SR for the Other Depository Corporations with a two-tothree-month lag.
9.
In February 2010, Turkey made a high-level political commitment to work with
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) to address its strategic
AML/CFT deficiencies1. Since that time, Turkey has demonstrated progress in improving its
AML/CFT regime, including by drafting CFT legislation. However, the FATF has
determined that certain strategic AML/CFT deficiencies remain. The authorities plan to
address these deficiencies by implementing their action plan, which calls for: (i) adequately

1

Statement by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on “Improving global AML/CFT compliance: ongoing
process”, June 25, 2010.

9
criminalizing terrorist financing; and (ii) implementing an adequate legal framework for
identifying and freezing terrorist assets.
External sector statistics
10.

In line with SDDS prescriptions, Turkey disseminates:



monthly balance of payments (BOP) statistics with a 5–6 week lag;



weekly international reserves with a one-week lag;



monthly data on the template on international reserves and foreign currency liquidity
(reserve template) within one month after the reference period;



monthly merchandise trade data with a one month lag;



quarterly external debt with one quarter lag; and



international investment position (IIP) data with a six month lag.

11.
The central bank reports quarterly BOP data to STA with about four months
lag. Balance of payments and IIP statistics are compiled in broad conformity with the
conceptual framework of the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5). The
CBT periodically reviews the international transactions reporting system (ITRS) to address
problems of coverage and misclassification using supplemental data sources and estimation
techniques.

10
TURKEY: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(As of June 30, 2010)
Date of
latest

Date
received

observation

Frequency
of
7

data

Frequency
of
reporting

7

Frequency
of
7
publication

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
8
soundness

Data Quality
Accuracy
and reliability

O,O, LO, O

O, O, O, O, O

9

Exchange Rates

06/30/10

06/30/10

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the
1
Monetary Authorities

06/30/10

06/30/10

W

W

W

Reserve/Base Money (narrow
definition)

06/30/10

06/30/10

W and M

W and M

W and M

Reserve/Base Money (broad
definition)

06/30/10

06/30/10

W and M

W and M

W and M

Broad Money

06/30/2010

06/30/10

W and M

W and M

W and M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

June 2010

06/30/10

W and M

W and M

W and M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

June 2010

06/30/10

W and M

W and M

W and M

06/30/10

06/30/10

D/W/M

D/W/M

W/M

Consumer Price Index

June 2010

07/02/2010

M

M

M

O,LO,O,LO

O, O, O, O, O

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
3
and Composition of Financing –
4
General Government

May, 2010

05/15/2010

M

M

M

O, LO, O, O

O, O, LO, O, LO

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
3
and Composition of Financing –
Central Government

May, 2010

05/15/2010

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and
Central Government-Guaranteed
5
Debt

March
2010

06/30/2010

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

April 2010

06/11/2010

M

M

M

O, O, O, LO

O, O, O, O, O

Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

April 2010

06/11/2010

M

M

M

Q1 2010

06/30/2010

Q

Q

Q

O, LO,O, O

LO, O, LO, O, LO

April 2010

06/17/2010

Q

Q

Q

April 2010

06/18/2010

A

A

A

Interest Rates

2

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
International Investment Position

6

1
Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency
but settled by other means as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but
settled by other means.
2

Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.

3

Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.

4

The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.

5

Including currency and maturity composition.

6

Includes external gross financial assets and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.

7

Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).

8

Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published in September 2009 and based on the findings of the mission that took place during November 3-17, 2008.
The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively) concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are
fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).

9
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data,
assessment and valid.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/107
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 30, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Post-Program Monitoring with Turkey
On 30 July, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring with Turkey.1
Background
Almost a decade of sound macroeconomic policies and reforms allowed Turkey to enter the
global financial crisis in a stronger position than many other countries in Emerging Europe. Prior
to the crisis, a more contained foreign credit-induced boom, better focus of policies on leaning
against the cyclical upswing, and a more restrictive regulatory environment for credit helped
limit the build-up of vulnerabilities and kept banks’ and households’ balance sheets strong.
These strengths helped the Turkish economy rebound quickly from the steep drop in output
precipitated by the global financial crisis. After plummeting during late 2008 and early 2009,
GDP recovered rapidly on the reflow of capital and the consequent improvement in domestic
confidence. The broadly appropriate relaxation of fiscal, monetary, and financial policies also
contributed to the recovery. In all, GDP fell 4¾ percent in 2009. However, the current account
deficit, which shrank in 2009 on weak demand, has since widened. Large excise increases and
food price shocks in early 2010 caused a temporary spike in inflation that also raised inflation
expectations. Unemployment, while moderating from its peak, remains elevated. Nevertheless,
the banking sector has seen only a modest rise in the share of nonperforming loans and capital
adequacy ratios remain high.
The recovery is expected to remain strong in the near term, accompanied by widening external
imbalances. Growth is likely to exceed 6 percent this year owing to base effects and solid
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
within-year momentum from credit-driven demand. Inflation is forecast to continue to subside
but remain in the upper half of the target band. With the resumption of growth and abundant
global capital flows, the current account deficit is expected to widen to 4¾ percent of GDP on
buoyant import growth. This reflects the heavy cost of formal sector employment and the high
energy intensity of output. With growth dependent on foreign financing, low reserve cover and
the shorter duration of capital inflows could raise output volatility if global conditions deteriorate
or risk appetite weakens.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Turkish authorities for their far-reaching reforms and
prudent policy stance that limited vulnerabilities prior to the crisis, paved the way for an effective
crisis response, and contributed to the robust economic recovery now underway. Directors
considered that Turkey’s main challenge is to contain external imbalances that could undermine
the recovery. In particular, they noted that an excessive reliance on imports would deteriorate
the external position, making growth dependent on potentially unstable external financing, given
the uncertain global outlook.
Directors observed that containing external imbalances requires bringing forward the exit from
crisis-related stimulus and undertaking reforms to limit import dependence by lowering
production costs. They encouraged the authorities to step up the unwinding of fiscal stimulus in
2010 by saving all revenue overperformance in excess of mandatory spending increases. This
would help contain current account and inflation pressures, limit private sector crowding out,
and reinforce the authorities’ fiscal discipline credentials.
Directors welcomed the preparation of a new fiscal rule, which they considered would
significantly strengthen the policy framework, and hoped that it will underpin the preparation of
the 2011 budget. In this regard, they looked forward to a swift approval of the draft legislation
and hoped the delay in its consideration would be short lived. They noted that the success of
the rule would depend on the authorities’ steadfast commitment, backed by strong political
support and sufficient auxiliary measures, including a strengthening of tax administration and
containment of spending pressures.
With interest rates in advanced countries at historical lows and inflation pressures at home
moderating, most Directors called for a gradual monetary tightening, which would obviate the
need for a sharper and larger tightening later on. Directors endorsed staff’s proposal for a
moderate increase in the amount of daily, preannounced foreign-currency purchases to more
quickly build reserves to protect against capital account volatility, while preserving exchange
rate flexibility within the inflation-targeting framework.
Directors generally called for phasing out financial sector regulatory relaxation—initially
introduced, as in many countries, in response to the global crisis. To prevent the buildup of
future risks, Directors recommended strengthening macro-prudential regulations on credit
cards, unhedged lending to firms, and debt-service limits on mortgages, as well as utilizing
more comprehensive stress test scenarios. Directors welcomed the authorities’ request for an
FSAP update during 2011.

3
Directors took note of staff’s assessment of the existence of a competitiveness gap. They
underscored the need for bold structural reforms to bolster competitiveness, secure job-rich
growth, reduce reliance on external saving, and lower import dependence. They advocated
better alignment of employment costs with those of regional peers. In this regard, Directors
welcomed the preparation of a comprehensive employment strategy, which aims at increasing
flexibility and addressing some structural issues in the labor market. Sustained and uniform
application of the energy cost pass-through pricing formula would moderate demand for
imported energy by promoting conservation and more efficient generation capacity.
The next Article IV consultation with Turkey is expected to be held on the standard 12-month
cycle.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Table 1. Turkey: Selected Economic Indicators, 2005−10
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009
Prelim.

2010
Proj.

(Percent)
Real sector
Real GDP growth rate
Private consumption growth rate
Private gross fixed investment growth rate
Contributions to GDP growth
Private domestic demand
Public spending
Net exports
GDP deflator growth rate
Nominal GDP growth rate
CPI inflation (12-month; end-of period)
PPI inflation (12-month; end-of-period)
Unemployment rate

8.4
7.9
16.2

6.9
4.6
15.0

4.7
5.5
2.6

0.7
-0.3
-9.0

-4.7
-2.3
-22.3

6.1
6.1
20.5

8.8
1.0
-1.4
7.1
16.1
7.7
2.7
10.2

6.3
0.9
-0.3
9.3
16.9
9.7
11.6
9.9

5.0
0.8
-1.2
6.2
11.2
8.4
5.9
10.3

-1.8
0.6
1.9
12.0
12.7
10.1
8.1
11.0

-8.1
0.7
2.7
5.4
0.4
6.5
5.9
14.1

8.7
-0.5
-2.1
8.2
14.8
7.6
7.1
…

Average nominal treasury bill interest rate
Average ex-ante real interest rate

16.2
6.0

18.1
8.6

10.9
2.0

...
...

Nonfinancial public sector 1/
Primary balance
Net interest payments
Overall balance

5.0
5.3
-0.3

4.7
5.1
-0.4

3.1
4.9
-1.9

1.6
4.4
-2.8

-1.0
4.6
-5.6

-0.3
3.7
-4.1

Debt of the public sector
General government gross debt (EU definition)
Net debt 2/

52.3
46.3

46.1
40.0

39.4
34.4

39.5
34.5

45.4
39.4

44.1
38.4

External sector
Current account balance
Nonfuel current account balance
Gross financing requirement
Foreign direct investment (net)
Gross external debt 3/
Net external debt
Short-term external debt (by remaining maturity)

-4.6
-0.7
15.9
1.9
35.2
20.3
14.2

-6.1
-1.3
21.0
3.6
39.3
21.0
15.0

-5.9
-1.5
18.7
3.1
38.4
21.0
11.6

-5.7
-0.2
18.8
2.2
37.9
21.6
15.5

-2.3
2.0
17.0
1.0
43.6
25.1
13.2

-4.7
-0.2
14.9
1.2
41.3
25.0
15.2

Monetary aggregates
Nominal growth of M2 broad money (percent)

24.5

24.7

15.7

26.7

13.0

…

482.7
648.9

529.2
758.4

649.1
843.2

730.3
950.5

615.3
954.0

…
1,095.6

GDP (billions of U.S. dollars) 4/
GDP (billions of Turkish lira)

18.1
19.3
6.9
12.2
(Percent of GDP)

Per capita GDP (2009): $8,723 (WEO)
Quota (2009): SDR 1,191.3 million (1,837 million U.S. dollars)
Sources: Turkish authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal projections assume the authorities adhere to their budget target for 2010.
2/ Nonfinancial public sector net debt.
3/ The external debt ratio is calculated by dividing external debt numbers in U.S. dollars based on official Treasury figures by GDP in U.S. dollars
calculated by staff using the average exchange rate (consolidated from daily data published by the CBT).
4/ GDP in U.S. dollars is derived using the average exchange rate (consolidated from daily data published by the CBT).

