© 2010 International Monetary Fund
[Month, Day], 201 August 2, 2001

January 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/27

Bolivia: 2009 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; Staff Statement;
Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the
Executive Director for Bolivia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2009 Article IV consultation with Bolivia, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the 2009 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on November 18, 2009, with the officials of Bolivia on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on December 23, 2009. The views expressed
in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A staff supplement on the debt sustainability analysis.

•

A staff statement.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its January 15, 2010, discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Bolivia.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of marketsensitive information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BOLIVIA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2009 Article IV Consultation with Bolivia
Approved by Antônio Furtado and Michele Shannon
December 23, 2009

Discussions. Article IV consultation discussions were held in Santa Cruz and La
Paz during November 5–18. Staff representatives comprised by Messrs. Lopetegui
(head), Breuer (regional Resident Representative), Peraza, Sosa (all WHD), and
Bornhorst (FAD). The team met with finance minister Luis Arce, planning minister
Noel Aguirre, central bank president Gabriel Loza, financial sector superintendent
Ernesto Rivero, other key public sector officials, and representatives of the private
sector.

Focus of the consultation. Discussions focused on the macroeconomic
performance in the context of the global crisis, on the appropriateness of the policy mix
for 2010, and on structural issues, in particular initiatives that the authorities are set to
launch to implement constitutional mandates.

Key policy recommendations. As growth is expected to rebound and fiscal
policy would provide some impulse, the authorities are advised to curtail the monetary
stimulus in 2010. Staff emphasizes the desirability of adopting a framework to manage
natural resource wealth to help ensure long-term fiscal sustainability and
intergenerational equity, provide for greater policy flexibility in the face of shocks, and
facilitate the development of a more independent monetary policy. The mission
highlighted the benefits for private sector investment of removing expeditiously
uncertainties in the legal framework, especially in hydrocarbon and mining sectors.

Exchange system. Bolivia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4. The exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions. The de jure exchange rate
regime is a crawling peg, and the exchange rate has been de facto stabilized against the
US dollar since October 2008.

Statistics. Despite shortcomings, data provision is broadly adequate for
surveillance. Bolivia has participated in the General Data Dissemination System
(GDDS) since November 2002.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I.

Background ....................................................................................................................4

II.

Recent Economic developments and Outlook for 2010 ................................................6

III.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................10
A. Macroeconomic Policies ......................................................................................10
B. Structural Policies.................................................................................................13

IV.

Medium-Term Outlook ................................................................................................16

V.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................18

Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Fiscal Stance During the Commodity Price Boom. .......................................................5
Social Programs .............................................................................................................6
Financial Sector Structure and Developments. ..............................................................8
Dollarization Trends and Policies ..................................................................................9
Exchange Rate Assessment..........................................................................................12
Regional Autonomy and Revenue-sharing Arrangements ..........................................15
Upside Risks in Potential Growth ................................................................................18

Figures
1.
Real Sector Developments ...........................................................................................21
2.
External Developments ................................................................................................22
3.
Fiscal Developments ....................................................................................................23
4.
Monetary Developments ..............................................................................................24
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators ...............................................................25
Operations of the Combined Public Sector ..................................................................26
Operations of the Combined Public Sector .................................................................27
Central Bank of Bolivia ...............................................................................................28
Financial System Survey..............................................................................................29
Balance of Payments ....................................................................................................30
Alternative Medium-Term Scenario ............................................................................31
Selected Vulnerability Indictors ..................................................................................32
Millennium Development Goals ..................................................................................33

Annexes
1.
Summary of Annexes ...................................................................................................34

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In recent years, Bolivia benefited from a sharp improvement in terms of trade.
Increased export volumes of gas and mining and the concurrent boom in commodities
prices led to a sharp increase in export receipts. Large accumulation of international
reserves and significant fiscal surpluses during the boom years contributed to turn Bolivia
into a net external creditor.

The impact of the global recession on Bolivia has been milder than in other
countries in the region. In 2009, real output growth is estimated to slow to 3¼ percent,
with a sharp decline in inflation. Lower commodity exports and remittances have resulted
in a sharp narrowing of the external current account surplus. The financial system has been
barely affected by the global crisis owing to its limited integration with international
capital markets.

A moderately countercyclical policy mix has supported domestic demand. In
2009, the fiscal surplus is expected to narrow by 4 percentage points of GDP, to a near
balance, largely due to lower hydrocarbon and tax revenue. In parallel, the central bank let
short-term interest rates decline to almost zero, which is being transmitted gradually into
banks’ deposit and loan rates.

As the economy gathers momentum, a tighter monetary policy is needed to
reduce the risks of excessive credit creation, foreign-exchange pressures, and a pickup in inflation. The monetary impulse should be withdrawn—especially if external
interest rates were to increase—to absorb excess bank liquidity.

The fiscal stance for 2010—including a nearly balanced budget—is consistent
with continued domestic and external stability. Staff welcomes the authorities’
consideration to a number of reforms that would, over the medium term, reduce excessive
reliance on hydrocarbon revenue, including stronger direct taxation, rebalancing of
spending responsibilities and revenue assignments across different levels of government,
and a fiscal framework for the management of natural resources.

There is no significant evidence of exchange rate misalignment. The authorities
agree that they should resume adjustments under the crawling peg should external
imbalances re-emerge. Over the medium term, the authorities should consider moving
from the crawling peg towards a more flexible exchange rate regime, to enhance the
capacity to respond to external shocks.

In the financial sector, recent regulations to strengthen liquidity and credit risk
management are appropriately focused. Staff suggests pressing ahead with pending
structural reforms and maintaining vigilant supervision.

Improving the investment climate remains a top priority. It will be important that
the laws under preparation to implement constitutional mandates are consistent with
ensuring a clear and stable framework for private investment.

4
I.

BACKGROUND

1.
In recent years, Bolivia benefited from a sharp improvement in terms of trade.
Increased export volumes of gas and mining—the result of large investments in
hydrocarbon and mining sectors earlier this decade—and the concurrent boom in
commodities prices led to a 230 percent increase in export receipts between 2005 and 2008.
Real GDP growth, which averaged 3.4 percent annually during 1996–2005, increased to an
average of 5.2 percent in 2006–08, peaking at 6.1 percent in 2008.
2.
The external and fiscal positions strengthened sharply during the boom years.
Larger export receipts, coupled with higher taxation of the hydrocarbon sector and moderate
rates of increase in government spending (Box 1), led to substantial external current account
and fiscal surpluses, which averaged 11.8 percent of GDP and 3.8 percent of GDP
respectively in 2006–08. These surpluses contributed to the build-up of a comfortable
reserves buffer, which—added to the debt relief obtained under MDRI—turned Bolivia into
a net external creditor in 2008. Gross public sector debt declined to less than 40 percent of
GDP by 2008 and net public sector debt to only 20 percent of GDP, thanks to the
accumulation of substantial deposits at the central bank.1 However, despite the highly
favorable trends, private investment remained subdued, amid political tensions and
lingering uncertainty about property rights.
3.
The administration that took office in early 2006 has focused on expanding the
social safety net and improving infrastructure. The government strategy has been to
distribute the rents of the natural resource sectors through transfer programs, which are
benefiting the poorest segments of the population (Box 2). In addition, investment in
infrastructure has gradually increased, to improve access to basic services (water and
sanitations, energy) and the transport network (mainly roads).
4.
Meanwhile, Bolivia has experienced profound political changes. A centerpiece of
this process of change was the adoption of a new constitution in early 2009, which assigns
the state a greater role in economic development, including as the main stakeholder in key
strategic industries. On December 6, 2009, President Morales—the first president from an
indigenous background—was re-elected for a five-year period with continued strong
popular support. While social unrest subsided following the approval of the new
constitution, the political environment has remained complex in light of continuing regional
tensions that complicate fiscal policy coordination between the central and departmental
levels of government, and in particular regarding the use of hydrocarbon-derived resources
and related expenditure responsibilities.

1

In September 2009, Fitch upgraded Bolivia’s Foreign- and Local-Currency Issuer Default Ratings to “B” from
“B-“. More recently, Moody’s also raised the nation’s long-term foreign currency debt rating to B2 from B3.

5
5.
In completing the 2008 Article IV Consultation, the Executive Board found that
macroeconomic policies were broadly appropriate, and stressed the need for
structural reforms as well as improvements in the investment climate. In the fiscal area,
Directors recommended improving the efficiency and equity of the tax system, better
balancing spending responsibilities and revenue at different levels of government, gradually
reducing hydrocarbon subsidies to improve targeting of social policies, and strengthening
the budget process. Directors advised introducing prudential regulations to mitigate market
risks and credit risks from dollarization, a deposit insurance scheme, and the adoption of
legislation governing corporate bankruptcy and restructuring. There has been some progress
in the implementation of financial sector reforms and preparations to address fiscal issues
are ongoing, including with support of Fund’s technical assistance.
Box 1. Fiscal Stance During the Commodity Price Boom1/
Since 2005 the government has significantly increased its take on the hydrocarbons sector. The
special hydrocarbon tax (IDH) effectively increased royalties on hydrocarbon production to 50 percent.
At the same time, contracts with foreign companies were re-negotiated, the national oil company
(YPFB) was given exclusive rights for the commercialization of hydrocarbon products, and oil
companies were re-nationalized. Boosted by high international prices for oil, gas, and mining products,
commodity-related fiscal revenues increased from 6.8 percent of GDP in 2005 to 13.4 percent of GDP
in 2008.
Bolivia stands out for using a large part of higher commodity revenues to build macroeconomic
buffers during the 2005–08 boom. Compared with other commodity exporters in the region, Bolivia
saw the largest increase in commodity revenue and only a moderate increase in public expenditure.
Real revenue and primary expenditure growth
(average annual growth, in percent 2005-08)
18

14

Commodity exporting,
financially integrated
countries

Other commodity
exporting
countries

Bolivia

10

6

2

-2
Revenue

Expenditure

Other revenue

Revenue

Expenditure

Commodity related revenue

Grants

Revenue

Expenditure

Primary expenditure

____________________________________________
1/

For details, see Regional Economic Outlook, Western Hemisphere Department, October 2009.

6
Box 2. Social Programs
Bolivia remains one of the poorest countries in Latin America. In 2007, 60 percent of the population
lived in poverty, and 38 percent in extreme poverty. Extreme poverty is particularly high among the
indigenous population (61 percent, compared with 25 percent of the rest of the population). With a Gini
coefficient of about 0.6, Bolivia features one of the most unequal income distributions in the region.
Malnutrition, limited access to basic infrastructure (water, sanitation, and electricity) and insufficient
health and education facilities inhibit breaking the poverty cycle.
The government has taken significant steps to reduce poverty and improve the social safety net.
Various government agencies are implementing a number of social programs. Among them is the
extreme poverty eradication program Plan Vida, featuring a phased approach with an initial focus on the
poorest geographic areas. Cash transfers are an important component of social policies, including:


Renta Dignidad is a universal pension introduced in 2008—replacing and augmenting the former
Bonosol—for all Bolivians aged 60 and
Social spending, percent of GDP, 2007-2009
above, equivalent to about US$340 per year,
2007 2008 2009
with reduced benefits for those receiving any
Anti-poverty
spending
14.2 14.0 14.0
other pension. It is financed by a fixed share
3.1
3.1
…
of which Health
of the special hydrocarbon tax (IDH), with
Education
5.2
5.1
…
Cash transfer programs
1.1
1.7
2.0
contributions from all levels of government.



Bono Juancito Pinto was established in 2007
0.3
0.3
0.3
Bono Juanicito Pinto
…
…
0.2
Bono Juana Azurduy
as a conditional cash transfer program that
1/ For 2007 estimates for Bonosol.
aims to reduce school drop-out rates by
offering an annual cash transfer equivalent to about US$30 for all children attending public primary
schools.



Bono Juana Azurduy is a conditional cash transfer program introduced in 2009 for pregnant
women and young children, aiming at improving maternal care, reducing infant mortality, and
improving nutritional attainment; the equivalent of about US$150 is paid for regular pre-natal and
pediatric medical checkups.

Renta Dignidad 1/

0.8

1.4

1.5

The authorities reported that social policies are yielding important results, including a reduction in
extreme poverty of 4.8 percentage points in 2008 (especially in rural areas), a decline in school dropout
rates from 5.2 percent to 2.8 percent following the introduction of the Bono Juancito Pinto, and a
reduction in the illiteracy rate.

II.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK FOR 2010

6.
Despite the adverse impact of the global crisis, Bolivia remains in a position of
low vulnerability. Central bank’s foreign reserves have remained at historically high levels,
boosted by large valuation gains on non-U.S. dollar assets and the new SDR allocation,2 and
are equivalent to about 20 months of imports of goods and services and more than
100 percent of deposits in the banking sector, thus providing adequate safeguards in the face
of external shocks.3

2

The SDR allocation to Bolivia was equivalent to about US$200 million. The authorities have indicated that
they intend to maintain these resources as part of reserves.
3

See Precautionary Reserves: An Application to Bolivia, accompanying Selected Issues Paper (2009).

7
7.
While activity slowed down with the global recession, the impact has been
milder than in other countries in the region (Figure 1). Real output growth is projected
to slow to 3¼ percent in 2009 as a result of lower export volumes, mostly due to reduced
gas demand from Brazil, and weakened domestic absorption due to the negative terms of
trade shock and falling remittances. Lower food prices and a slowdown in domestic demand
have contributed to a sharp decline in the 12-month inflation rate, which stood at
0.8 percent in October and is projected at 1 percent by end-2009. Lower commodity exports
and remittances have resulted in a sharp narrowing of the external current account surplus to
about 3½ percent of GDP, compared with 12 percent of GDP in 2008 (Figure 2 and
Table 4).
8.
A moderately countercyclical policy mix has supported domestic demand. The
combined fiscal surplus is expected to narrow by 4 percentage points of GDP to an almost
balanced position in 2009, largely due to lower hydrocarbon and tax revenue (by
5 percentage points of GDP) (Figure 3 and Table 2). In parallel, the central bank reduced
open market operations while letting the short-term policy interest rates decline to almost
zero (Figure 4), in the context of a decline in foreign-currency inflows that had sharply
slowed money creation. This is being transmitted gradually into banks’ deposit and loan
rates, which remain at record low levels (1½ percent and 8½ percent respectively). With
regard to exchange rate policy, since October 2008 the central bank has effectively pegged
the Boliviano to the U.S. dollar, following a period of negative crawl (i.e., gradual
appreciation) that started in mid-2005.4
9.
The financial system has been barely affected by the global crisis owing to
limited integration with international capital markets. With negligible foreign credit
lines in banks’ balance sheets and no exposure to impaired foreign assets, banks have
remained liquid, profitable, and well capitalized (Box 3 and Table 8). The strengthening of
economic fundamentals and measures to induce voluntary Bolivianization of financial
assets have led to a significant decline in dollarization (Box 4). Nonetheless, the authorities
have increased marginal reserve requirements on dollar deposits to build up a higher
foreign-currency liquidity cushion for banks, and also have tightened provisioning
requirements, including through higher provisioning for dollar-denominated loans.

4

Bolivia’s exchange-rate regime does not contemplate a pre-announced rate of crawl; therefore, the central
bank has ample flexibility in terms of the frequency, direction, and magnitude of adjustments.

8
Box 3. Financial Sector Structure and Developments
Bolivia’s supervised financial system is composed of 63 institutions, with low shares of foreign and
public ownership. The system includes commercial banks, microfinance institutions (fondos financieros
privados (FFP)), credit cooperatives, credit associations (mutuales), mutual funds, pension funds, and other
financial services entities (warehouses, leasing companies, and a second-tier bank). The system is dominated
by domestic institutions with only 4 foreign banks altogether concentrating about 15 percent of banking
system assets. Only two institutions are owned partially or totally by the state: a commercial bank, Banco
Unión, representing about 7 percent of total bank assets, and a second-tier bank, Banco de Desarrollo
Productivo (BDP), with assets accounting for about 1.5 percent of total financial system assets.
Financial system assets amount to US$ 10.4bn (about 60 percent of GDP) with commercial banks
controlling over 78 percent of the system’s assets
1/
Credit to the Private Sector
(Index, January 2000 = 100)
(excluding mutual and pension funds). Bolivian
350
banks operate in line with traditional banking
activities, but also engage in microfinance
Commodity importers in
300
Central America, DOM,
operations. In contrast, FFP’s are financial
and URY
intermediaries oriented exclusively to microcredit.
250
Financial institutions in Bolivia rely almost
entirely on deposits. On average, deposits constitute
about 90 percent of total liabilities, most of them in
demand and savings accounts (52.6 percent of total
deposits). FFP’s rely more on bank financing, which
represents about 20 percent of total liabilities. On the
asset side, balance sheets are very liquid, in particular
banks, with almost half their assets in liquid
instruments including central bank paper. FFP’s
maintain a larger fraction of their assets in loans due
to the dynamism of microfinance. Overall, credit to
the private sector has exhibited a moderate nominal
expansion in recent years, declining in relation to GDP
from 42 percent in 2004 to about 33 percent in 2009.
Key financial soundness indicators are broadly in
line with regional averages. Capital adequacy is only
slightly lower than the region’s average, although a
greater difference exists when comparing equity/assets
ratios. While delinquency is higher in Bolivia,
provisioning levels are also higher and have improved
markedly in recent years. Profitability has remained at
healthy levels.

Inflation-targeting
commodity
exporters

200

400
350
300
250

Other
commodity
exporters2/

200

150
150
100

50

Bolivia

2000

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

100

08

Jun
09

50

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics ; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Index constructed using the simple average of monthly growth rates within each group.
2/ Excludes Bolivia, Suriname, and Venezuela.

Bolivia and Latin America Banking System Indicators
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 1/

Capital adequacy ratio
Latin America 2/
Bolivia

15.9
14.9

15.6
14.7

15.1
13.3

14.5
12.6

14.6
13.7

15.3
13.4

Equity/assets
Latin America
Bolivia

10.2
11.5

10.2
11.3

10.4
10.0

10.5
9.6

10.4
9.3

10.4
8.6

Non-performing loans
Latin America
Bolivia

5.6
14.0

4.0
11.3

3.0
8.7

2.6
5.6

2.4
4.3

3.0
4.1

Provisions/Non-performing loans
Latin America
129.0
Bolivia
84.2

140.1
85.9

159.5
106.5

176.1
132.4

180.0
153.7

160.0
181.0

Return on assets
Latin America
Bolivia

1.6
-0.1

2.0
0.7

2.1
1.3

2.1
1.9

1.9
1.7

1.9
1.6

Return on equity
Latin America
Bolivia

15.3
-1.2

18.9
6.4

20.9
13.3

20.9
21.2

19.8
20.3

18.6
19.7

The Financial System Supervisory Authority (ASFI) Sources: Global Financial Stability Report, October 2009, and ASFI.
1/ October for Bolivia, and May-June for most Latin American countries.
was put in charge of the consolidated supervision of all
2/ Simple regional average.
financial intermediaries (banks and non-banks), as well
as the insurance and securities market. Since its creation in early 2009, ASFI has continued expanding the
supervisory and regulatory perimeter to include cooperatives and other financial institutions. In the area of
prudential regulation, ASFI introduced countercyclical provisioning requirements in addition to specific and
generic provisioning requirements.

9
Box 4. Dollarization Trends and Policies
Dollarization has declined markedly in recent years in line with improving macroeconomic
fundamentals, the authorities’ efforts to promote market instruments in Bolivianos, and large net
interest-rate differentials. Empirical evidence in the case of Bolivia suggests that improvements in the
fiscal balance and the reserve position have a large negative impact on the demand for dollar denominated
debt instruments.1/ While there was a slight increase in the share of dollar deposits at the height of the
global crisis, the trend is similar to that observed in other highly-dollarized economies, possibly reflecting a
temporary rebalancing of private sector portfolios, and lower interest-rate differentials.
110
100

18

Banking System Deposit Dollarization
(In percent)

16

100
Expected returns1 and dollarization of bank deposits (in percent)

14
90

Uruguay

12

80

10

80

Bolivia

70
60

90

Dollarization
(RHS)

Expected return of boliviano
denominated deposits2

8

70

6

Peru

60

4

Expected return of FX
denominated deposits

2

50

50

0
2000

40

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

-2

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

40

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ One-month deposits.
2/ Moving average effective interest rate adjusted by depreciation.

The authorities have adopted a number of measures to make individuals and banks internalize the
risks in dollar-denominated financial intermediation. Measures include:



Marginal cash reserve requirements: financial intermediaries are subject to a marginal cash reserve
requirement of 30 percent of deposits in US$ above the level observed on September 30, 2008.



Provisioning requirements for dollar-denominated loans: Since early 2009, dollar-denominated loans
classified as “A” (best quality) are required to constitute an additional provision of up to 1.5 percent.



Financial transaction tax: the tax, at a rate of 0.15 percent for both credits and debits, applies on
dollar denominated accounts while transactions in Bolivianos are exempted.



Bid-ask FX spread: since mid-2005 the central bank began gradually increasing the differential
between the buying and selling rate (now at 1.4 percent) to discourage currency shifts.

________________________________
1/

Vesperoni and Orellana, Dollarization and Maturity Structure of Public Securities: The Experience of
Bolivia, WP/08/157.

10
10.
The macroeconomic outlook for 2010 is favorable. Real GDP growth is expected
to pick up to 4 percent, reflecting mainly a recovery of hydrocarbon exports and public
investment, and still favorable terms-of-trade, with inflation projected to rise to about
4 percent. The external current account surplus is expected to narrow moderately to
2½ percent of GDP, as a result of increased domestic absorption, while the overall balance
of payments is projected to remain positive.
Bolivia: Selected Economic Indicators

Real GDP (percent change)
CPI (end-of-period, percent change)
Overall fiscal balance (percent of GDP)
of which : Non-hydrocarbons fiscal balance (percent of GDP)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)

III.

2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

Proj.
2010

4.8
4.9
4.5
-5.7
11.3

4.6
11.7
1.9
-5.9
12.0

6.1
11.8
2.8
-8.4
12.1

3.3
1.0
0.1
-8.3
3.5

4.0
4.0
-0.3
-7.7
2.6

POLICY DISCUSSIONS

11.
There was agreement that the policy response to the international crisis has
been appropriate. The central bank argued that the temporary pegging of the exchange rate
has been necessary to avoid excessive exchange rate volatility and protect gains from dedollarization, while the comfortable level of international reserves provided ample space to
face episodic capital outflows. In parallel, the central bank eased monetary policy beginning
in early 2009, thereby supporting domestic demand. On the fiscal front, the authorities
allowed automatic stabilizers to operate and protected social and investment expenditure
despite the significantly lower revenue. The authorities emphasized that social programs
have had an important effect in sustaining domestic consumption, as transfers are oriented
towards low income households with high propensity to consume.
A.

Macroeconomic Policies

12.
The overall fiscal position is projected to shift into a small deficit of 0.3 percent
of GDP in 2010. Staff projections suggest that hydrocarbon and tax revenue would remain
broadly stable, while the surplus of public enterprises would increase by 1.7 percent of
GDP, mostly on account of better results at the state-owned oil company (YPFB),
associated with higher gas exports. On the expenditure side, the budget envisages an
increase in current and capital expenditure. Budget allocations for wages and pensions
would increase by about 10 percent in nominal terms, allowing for a recomposition of real
wages after a few years of declines in real terms. Investment, in turn, will pick up at YPFB
to advance the industrialization of natural gas, increase production in existing fields, and
address other bottlenecks along the production chain. It is expected that this investment

11
(US$ 600 million in 2010, or 3.1 percent of GDP) would be financed by a special credit line
from the central bank that was established by law in 2008.5
13.
The main downside risk to the outlook stems from lower commodity prices and
export volumes, should the global economy rebound falter. Staff estimates that a decline
in oil prices to just below US$50 per barrel in 2010—an event with a 15 percent probability
according to current option contracts on oil futures—would have an impact on the external
and fiscal balances of 4.8 percent of GDP and 3.8 percent of GDP respectively. While
overall reserve cushions would be adequate to prevent the adjustment of fiscal policy in this
scenario—if proved temporary— the central administration could face financing
difficulties, since the financial cushion of the Treasury is estimated to be relatively small.
Upside risks include the possibility of a stronger than expected improvement in commodity
prices.
14.
Staff advised tightening monetary conditions as the economy gathers
momentum and the government gradually implements its investment plans. In
particular, since government spending is envisaged to expand, the monetary impulse should
be withdrawn—especially if external interest rates were to increase—to absorb excess
liquidity in the banking system, which stands at about 12 percent of deposits. The mission
argued that this would reduce the risks of excessive credit creation, foreign-exchange
pressures, and pick-up in inflation. The authorities indicated that they would tighten
monetary policy as warranted by inflation and balance of payments developments. For now,
they considered that higher credit expansion was needed to support the economic recovery.
15.
The central bank indicated its readiness to resume adjustments under the
crawling peg, in either direction, upon the emergence of external imbalances. However,
in the event of pressures toward appreciation, the authorities indicated that they would, at
the same time, seek to avoid an excessive erosion of competitiveness vis-à-vis neighboring
countries. While there was agreement that there is no immediate need to alter the exchange
rate given high and stable international reserves and no significant signs of exchange rate
misalignment (Box 5), staff did not see competitiveness issues to be a near-term concern
and advised that exchange rate adjustments resume as soon as external conditions implied
that significant bank intervention would be needed to maintain the current rate.

5

The 2009 Budget law approved central bank financing to YPFB for up to US$1 billion (about 6 percent of
GDP). Earlier this year, the central bank signed an agreement with YPFB envisaging disbursements up to this
total over a 3-year period.

12
Box 5. Exchange Rate Assessment
Staff estimates suggest that the Boliviano is broadly in line with fundamentals, with evidence of
some undervaluation. These estimates are based on
Bolivia: ER Assessment
CGER methodologies: the macroeconomic balance
REER Deviation from Equilibrium 1/
(MB) approach, the equilibrium real exchange rate
(in percent)
(ERER) approach, and the external sustainability (ES)
1
MB approach
-1.3
approach. While the three approaches point to some
undervaluation, all the estimates of undervaluation are
ES approach
-3.1
smaller than 10 percent, with an average of less than
ERER approach
-8.9
5percent. Based on this—and given that the projected
Average
-4.4
current account in the medium term is close to the
estimated norm—staff considers the Boliviano to be
Source: Fund staff estimates.
close to equilibrium.
1/ Undervaluation (-), overvaluation (+)
The MB approach points to no real effective exchange rate (REER) misalignment. The REER
would need to appreciate by only 1¼ percent to close the difference between the underlying current
account balance (CAB) and the estimated equilibrium CAB, or current account norm. This result hinges
on an underlying CAB equal to 3½ percent of GDP, and a norm estimated at 2.8 percent of GDP. This
level of the current account norm reflects 120
ERER Approach
mainly relatively high petroleum trade
115
balances and low old-age dependency
110
105
ratios.
100
95
90
Equilibrium
REER

85
80

REER

75

2009Q1

2008Q1

2007Q1

2006Q1

2005Q1

2004Q1

2003Q1

2002Q1

2001Q1

2000Q1

1999Q1

1998Q1

1997Q1

1996Q1

1995Q1

1994Q1

70
1993Q1

The ES approach suggests that the
Boliviano is slightly undervalued.
Under this approach there is a small
undervaluation of about 3 percent, if we
assume that Bolivia’s net foreign assets
stabilize at the end-2008 level.

Finally, the ERER approach points to
some undervaluation. The model
explains the REER on the basis of the terms of trade, net foreign assets, public expenditure, FDI, and
relative productivity. The appreciation of the REER in the last quarter of 2008 (mainly a result of trading
partners’ currency depreciation) almost eliminated the undervaluation observed in 2006–08. However, as
the currencies of trading partners recovered in the recent months, the REER depreciated, causing an
undervaluation with respect to the estimated equilibrium level of about 9 percent.
There are uncertainties associated with the application of these methodologies to Bolivia. They do
not fully incorporate the implications of the exhaustion of a natural resource within a predictable timeframe, and the associated intergenerational considerations that may drive net asset accumulation in the
near term. In addition, current account volatility is particularly high in Bolivia because of commodity
price fluctuations, which makes it difficult to separate underlying trends from temporary changes, thus
complicating the estimation of the underlying current account balance. Finally, the Bolivian economy
has experienced large structural changes in recent years; hence, past values of fundamental variables
may be poor guides of their appropriate future levels.
____________________
1

For details on these methodologies, see IMF Occasional Paper 261 (2008).

13
16.
Staff encouraged the authorities to consider replacing the crawling peg, over
the medium term, with a more flexible exchange rate regime, to enhance the capacity
to respond to external shocks. The authorities concurred that monetary policy should
focus primarily on price stability, while allowing the exchange rate to adjust to different
external environments. However, they emphasized that a further substantial decline in
dollarization would be needed before abandoning the crawling peg regime. Moreover, they
emphasized that there is still a strong channel of transmission from the exchange rate to
inflation, and that the crawl gives them some flexibility to adjust to different external
scenarios. Staff noted that under the crawl, terms-of-trade volatility would demand skillful
liquidity management, and suggested that a fiscal rule to smooth out commodity-price
fluctuations would facilitate the move towards more flexibility by reducing the volatility of
external imbalances (during oil price booms and busts). To enhance credibility of monetary
policy, staff recommended avoiding in the future central bank financing of the government
or public corporations.
B.

Structural Policies

17.
The government is embarking on profound legal changes called upon by the
new constitution. The authorities estimate that around 100 laws will need to be approved,
including on key structural issues such as intergovernmental relations, the exploitation of
natural resources (hydrocarbons, minerals) and land.
Supply Side Policies
18.
The authorities attach importance to strategic partnerships with the private
sector to achieve sustained growth. Their development strategy envisages the expansion
of natural resource production and its industrialization, which would demand large
investments. The authorities’ intention is to allow private participation in the capital and
management of public enterprises, or to engage in production/service agreements with the
private sector, to achieve higher leveraging capacity and facilitate the adoption of modern
management techniques and technology. They are working on legal reforms to foster the
efficiency of public corporations and provide the tools for effective management, including
wage policy and procurement. Staff highlighted that removing expeditiously uncertainties in
the legal framework would have benefits for private sector investment, particularly in the
hydrocarbon sector. This should be accompanied by a strategy geared specifically to
attracting private investment and, more generally, improving the business climate. To help
develop the domestic credit market, staff advised introducing modern procedures for the
restructuring of private firms, including in the case of bankruptcy, as recommended by the
2003 FSAP to better protect creditors’ claims. The authorities noted that they are working
on legislation to set up a guarantee fund for medium-size businesses and insurance for
agricultural activities, initiatives that would improve access to credit.

14
Fiscal Reforms
19.
The authorities are working on a number of initiatives to improve the fiscal
policy framework. There was broad agreement on the need to address five important
issues:

Tax reform. This is needed to broaden the non-hydrocarbon tax base to reduce fiscal
vulnerability to commodity price shocks and improve the efficiency and equity of the tax
system. The authorities are working on a number of measures, with support of technical
assistance from the Fund, to make the tax system more progressive. 6

Reform of intergovernmental fiscal relations. The constitution draws a road map for
the decentralization of government activities, which will start with the approval of the Law
of Autonomies in 2010. While reform in this area is likely to be gradual, moving toward a
better balance between revenue assignments and spending responsibilities at different levels
of government is essential for the central administration to regain strength in its finances,
including to finance countercyclical fiscal policy. This will require a pragmatic revision of
expenditure responsibilities across levels of government and an appropriate adjustment of
the revenue sharing arrangements in the context of the Fiscal Pact (Box 6).

Long-term framework for the management of natural resource wealth. The
authorities are considering adopting a formal framework for the fiscal management of
natural resource wealth to enhance macro-fiscal policy effectiveness and serve as a guide to
the conduct fiscal policy in the face of volatile external factors. Such a framework will help
introduce intergenerational considerations in the exploitation of nonrenewable natural
resources and provide for the stabilization of domestic demand through a saving/withdrawal
rule to smooth out price fluctuations. Financial savings should be placed in a special
government fund with the central bank. Consistent with this approach, the assessment of the
fiscal position could be made on the basis of the non-natural-resource balance.

Public enterprise reform. In addition to the legislation referred to earlier, there is a
need for measures to mitigate potential risks to the Treasury from state-owned enterprises.
Staff suggested having all state-owned firms subject to annual independent audits and
eliminating any fiscal or quasi-fiscal functions by these enterprises. In addition, the Ministry
of Economy and Public Finance should develop expertise in the financial operations of the
large firms, in particular YPFB. The coverage of public sector accounts should be expanded
to include all public enterprises, and their performance reflected in the budget and related
documents.

6

See Hydrocarbon Revenue Sharing Arrangements, accompanying Selected Issues Paper (2009).

15
Box 6. Regional Autonomy and Revenue-sharing Arrangements1/
The new constitution, ratified in February 2009, calls for the establishment of four subnational
autonomies (departments, regions, municipalities, and indigenous autonomies) and specifies which
competencies may or may not be exercised by each level of government. Autonomy statutes, defining
the vertical and horizontal distribution of competencies will be drafted, and—subject to passing a local
referendum—submitted to the constitutional court for consideration and approval. The Law on
Autonomies and related legislation—expected to be passed in 2010—will govern this process, and
implementation is expected to begin in 2011.
The government has started work to determine the cost of competencies in key areas such as health,
education, and infrastructure, based on historic data, to determine the resource transfer that may need to
accompany the devolution of competencies in these areas. Resources are intended to be transferred in
line with expenditure responsibilities and after assessing the execution capacity of subnational entities.
The re-organization of intergovernmental fiscal relations will be managed through a negotiation process
known as the Fiscal Pact.
The current revenue-sharing arrangement directs around 55 percent of hydrocarbon revenue2/
and 20 percent of other tax revenue
Subnational fiscal operations, 2006-2009, percent of GDP
to subnational governments and
2006
2007
2008 2009(p)
universities. The distribution is not
Overall balance
4.5
2.6
4.3
0.4
linked to the actual expenditure needs
Central administration
1.9
1.6
-0.3
-1.6
of subnational governments, but is
Prefectures (departments)
0.8
0.6
0.2
…
largely determined by their own
Municipalities
1.1
0.6
0.3
…
hydrocarbon production and size.
Hydrocarbon revenue 1/
Thus, regional disparities in
Non-financial public sector
11.6
11.3
10.6
10.5
Central administration
6.4
4.7
3.9
3.9
socioeconomic development remain
Prefectures (departments)
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.7
significant and natural resource
Municipalities
0.3
1.5
1.5
1.5
endowments continue to be the
Universities
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.4
determinant factor of regional wealth.
Through successive changes in
1/ IDH, royalties and excise tax on fuel.
revenue sharing, the central
administration’s fiscal position has deteriorated steadily, while hydrocarbon revenue windfalls and low
spending-execution rates by subnational governments—due to earmarking arrangements and capacity
constraints—have led to surpluses and significant deposit accumulation.
A better balance between overall revenue assignments and spending responsibilities would
improve resource allocation. By revisiting the automatic link between hydrocarbon and subnational
revenue, pro-cyclical features of subnational spending could be reduced and subnational budget
predictability improved. At the same time, such balance would help achieve fiscal neutrality of the
decentralization process and rebalance the financial position of the central administration. Earmarking
provisions for the use of hydrocarbon revenues could be relaxed to achieve an optimal mix of current
and capital expenditure. As regional autonomies begin to exercise their tax authority it will be important
to strengthen subnational revenue administration and coordinate tax policies nationally.
_______________________
1/
2/

See Hydrocarbon Revenue Sharing Arrangements, accompanying Selected Issues Paper (2009).
Shared hydrocarbon revenue includes IDH, royalties, and the excise tax on fuel.

16

Public sector financial management. As new laws are required to govern the public
sector financial administration, the authorities are working on measures to improve the
budget process, including with technical assistance from the Fund.
20.
Staff encouraged the authorities to revisit the policy on energy subsidies, with a
view to creating additional fiscal space for better-focused social programs. Staff noted
that in addition to the direct cost to the budget of about 2 percent of GDP in 2010, there are
additional costs—from domestic sales at prices below international reference prices—that
are putting pressure on the finances of public enterprises, notably YPFB, and represent a
significant opportunity cost.
Financial Sector Policies
21.
Staff welcomed recent regulations to strengthen liquidity and credit risk
management and suggested to press ahead with pending structural reforms and
maintain strong supervision. Staff expressed concern that the new constitution, by
eliminating the ability of the central bank to assume any liabilities of failed banks, may limit
bank resolution capacity, and encouraged the authorities to establish a deposit insurance
scheme, in line with FSAP recommendations. The authorities indicated that financial safety
net arrangements were under review and would be addressed when new financial legislation
is proposed. There was agreement that a priority in supervision would be to closely
supervise credit developments, and that the policy of ASFI—the financial sector regulatory
and supervisory body—to expand the perimeter of regulation to non-bank intermediaries
was appropriate. The authorities were also encouraged to request an update of the original
FSAP assessment conducted in 2003.
22.
The authorities agreed that activities of the Financial Intelligence Unit (UIF)
should be strengthened. While legislation on anti-money laundering appears to be
adequate, the definition of terrorist financing activities and its criminalization should be
incorporated to the law. Normalization of relations with the EGMONT Group of Financial
Intelligence Units and with the Financial Action Task Force of South America
(GAFISUD) would be important to avoid negative reputational effects and to benefit from
international cooperation, maintain best practices, ensure information exchange, and
improve training and sharing of expertise. The adequacy of the size and budget of the UIF
should be assessed to ensure that it can conduct its operations effectively.
IV.

MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK

23.
Over the medium-term, growth is projected to stabilize around 4 percent,
inflation to remain in the low single digits, and the external current account surplus to
be maintained. Growth would be driven mainly by expansion in the hydrocarbon and
mining sectors, as well as by somewhat higher public investment. The current account
surplus, in the range of 2–2½ percent of GDP, would reflect both higher gas exports (due to

17
a recovery of international prices and higher export volumes to Brazil) and higher imports
(in particular those associated with investment projects in hydrocarbon and mining). Under
this scenario, international reserves would continue to strengthen while the gross and net
public debt would follow downward trends.7 The projected external current account
surpluses would contribute to a steady increase in the BCB’s net international reserves and
the maintenance of safe liquidity cushions. In the fiscal area, after registering a small deficit
in 2010, the overall balance would return to small surpluses, of about ½ percent of GDP.
Hydrocarbon-related revenue would stabilize at about 10 percent of GDP, and public
investment would increase to about 11½ percent of GDP. The non-hydrocarbon deficit
would stabilize at 8 percent of GDP during the projection period.
24.
The authorities saw the staff’s scenario as subject to upside risks, arising inter
alia from the possible implementation of additional investment to further expand gas
and mineral production, and to industrialize these natural resources (Box 7). In
acknowledging these upside risks, staff emphasized that positive shocks could give rise to
mounting appreciation pressures over the medium- and long term, which would have to be
addressed by some combination of fiscal and exchange rate adjustment. Staff noted that
policy responsiveness in this context would be helped by a move to a more flexible
exchange rate regime (as discussed in paragraph 16).
25.
Staff suggested that, while the baseline medium-term outlook is consistent with
domestic and external stability, intergenerational equity considerations might warrant
a reduction of the non-hydrocarbon deficit from projected levels. At current production
levels, proven reserves are expected to last about 50 years.8 In order to extend the use of
hydrocarbon resources beyond this time horizon, the fiscal accounts would need to be
strengthened to generate additional savings. For example, staff estimates suggest that saving
an additional 1 percent of GDP annually over the next 50 years would extend the
hydrocarbon revenue stream by an additional 5 years. Additional savings would provide the
basis for building a special fiscal fund, over and above the projected accumulation of central
bank international reserves, to allow for the use of hydrocarbon-related resources while
maintaining adequate international reserves. While acknowledging the importance of this
issue, the authorities suggested that the intergenerational benefits from higher savings out of
hydrocarbon resources would have to be balanced against those from development-related
expenditure. Moreover, management of hydrocarbon resources needed to be placed in the
broader context of the overall natural resource management, including the incipient but
highly promising development of Bolivia’s massive reserves of lithium—demand for which
is likely to rise sharply in coming years as world production of batteries for electric vehicles
increases.
7

For a longer term perspective, see the accompanying External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis.

8

The authorities expect the results of an ongoing certification of gas reserves by mid-2010.

18
Box 7. Upside Risks to Potential Growth
Significant upside risks to potential growth in Bolivia stem from the implementation of various
large investment projects envisaged in the National Development Plan but not included in the
staff’s baseline scenario. Hydrocarbons, mining, and the electricity sector would receive the bulk of
these large investments.


Hydrocarbons. YPFP’s plan envisages an increase in production to 100 millions of cubic meters
per day (mm3/d) in the medium term, from about 40 mm3/d in 2008. To meet this target, both new
markets for the additional production and large investments are required. YPFB’s investment plan
entails investments in exploration and exploitation, transportation and storage, refining capacity,
and about 900,000 new household connections in the national gas network. Moreover, the plan
envisages key industrialization projects, such as the construction of two separation plants to
increase GLP volumes, a project to produce liquids from natural gas, and the construction of a
fertilizers plant. Total investments under the plan for 2010-15 would amount to $11.3 billion, of
which $7.5 billion would correspond to the state company.



Mining. The strategy of the sector envisages substantial investments in exploration, exploitation,
and—especially—industrialization. Plans for the production and industrialization of lithium, which
represents half of the world’s reserves and remains unexploited, are particularly important. A pilot
project will start to be implemented next year (aiming at producing 30,000 tons by 2014) in Salar
de Uyuni (the world’s largest salt flat), where there are approximately 140 million tons of metallic
lithium. Several foreign companies have already shown interest in exploiting Bolivia’s lithium
reserves, and the authorities estimate total potential investments in this area at $800 million.



Electricity. Six large projects—mostly hydroelectric—are in the pipeline for 2010–25, which
would more than double the current production capacity of about 1,100MW.

The authorities plan to attract FDI and to develop public-private partnerships to undertake part
of these large investment projects. To this end, they intend to promote risk-sharing contracts between
the key public enterprises and foreign investors. This is perceived as a key factor to gain capital,
technology, know-how, and managerial skills. Key legal reforms are needed to pave the way to attract
foreign investment and to implement the ambitious investment plans.

V. STAFF APPRAISAL
26.
Despite the global crisis, the Bolivian economy has performed well in 2009. Real
GDP growth has decelerated due to lower gas exports and a weakening of domestic demand
due to falling remittances and lower terms of trade, with inflation declining sharply. The
external current account and public sector balances, while strongly impacted by the adverse
external shocks, would remain in surplus. NIR have reached record high levels, offering
ample coverage of monetary aggregates and, thereby, reducing financial/external
vulnerabilities. The financial sector remains sound, with ample levels of liquidity, low
nonperforming loans, and adequate provisioning.
27.
The authorities’ strategy to deal with the external shock has been appropriate.
In the face of external risks, the central bank halted the appreciation of the boliviano,
providing a stable nominal anchor to avoid exchange rate volatility and protect important

19
gains from recent de-dollarization, while using reserves to address temporary capital
outflows in late 2008. Interest rates were reduced to stimulate credit demand and support
domestic activity. Fiscal policy focused on protecting social and infrastructure spending—
although the latter suffered from execution delays—while accommodating the cyclical
downturn in revenue.
28.
As the macroeconomic outlook for 2010 is favorable, the policy mix should be
adjusted. Real GDP growth is expected to pick up reflecting mainly a recovery of
hydrocarbon exports and public investment, while inflation is projected to rise moderately.
The external current account is expected to remain in surplus while the overall fiscal
position is expected to shift into a small deficit. As public expenditure provides further
stimulus and the economy rebounds in 2010, the authorities should tighten monetary
conditions to prevent excess liquidity in the banking sector, excessive credit creation,
foreign-exchange pressures, and a pick-up in inflation.
29.
The overall fiscal position remains sound, but the central administration could
face financing constraints if oil prices were to fall. Under baseline projections, gross and
net public debt are expected to decline gradually over the next few years, consolidating an
already strong fiscal position. Because of imbalances between the hydrocarbon-revenue
sharing arrangement and spending responsibilities, however, financial savings have been
primarily accumulated at subnational level and public enterprises. The financial cushion of
the Treasury is estimated to be relatively small, and the central government remains
vulnerable to oil price developments. Contingency financing plans should be prepared with
a view to protecting investment and social spending.
30.
While the fiscal position is consistent with macroeconomic stability and is
projected to result in lower public debt over the medium term, reliance on revenue
from natural resources, particularly hydrocarbons, remains high. Thus, and also on
intergenerational equity grounds, the authorities should consider strengthening the nonhydrocarbon balance and generate additional savings to extend the use of hydrocarbon
resource wealth beyond its physical depletion. To this end, a number of structural reforms
would be helpful and staff welcomes various initiatives under consideration by the
authorities. These include, most importantly, stronger direct taxation and the simplification
of the tax system; a rebalancing of spending responsibilities and revenue assignments across
different levels of government; and a framework for the fiscal management of natural
resources. Gradually phasing out fuel subsidies would create fiscal space to increase savings
and targeted social spending.
31.
The authorities appropriately stand ready to modify the rate of crawl of the
exchange rate, if needed. Maintaining a stable exchange rate has been useful to address
uncertainty in the context of the international economic crisis. While there is no significant
evidence of misalignment nor exchange-rate pressures, the authorities should monitor these
aspects closely and stand ready to reintroduce a positive or negative rate of crawl, as

20
appropriate. Over the medium term, as lower dollarization is more entrenched and domestic
financial markets develop further, the authorities should set the stage for greater exchange
rate flexibility. An important precondition for a credible and independent monetary policy
will be to avoid additional central bank financing of the government or public corporations.
Minimizing fiscal dominance, including through fiscal stabilization rules as suggested
above, would facilitate the conduct of monetary policy.
32.
In the financial sector, the authorities should focus on pending structural
reforms and maintain a strong financial supervision. As a priority, the authorities should
consider creating a deposit insurance scheme and take advantage of the favorable economic
environment to finalize the institutional framework to allow the orderly exit of failed
institutions. ASFI should continue supervising credit developments closely while expanding
the perimeter of regulation and supervision to include cooperatives and other unregulated
financial institutions. Legislation on anti-money laundering and the operations of the
Financial Intelligence Unit should be strengthened.
33.
Improving the investment climate remains a top priority. As the authorities
intend to fundamentally reform the legal and institutional framework, it will be important
that the laws under preparation to implement the constitution are consistent with ensuring a
clear and stable framework for private investment. The authorities should take advantage of
these legal reforms to introduce modern procedures for the restructuring of private firms,
including in the case of bankruptcy, which would help develop the domestic credit market.
34.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Bolivia be held on the
standard 12-month cycle.

21
Figure 1. Bolivia: Real Sector Developments
Bolivia's economy has weathered the global recession well. Real GDP growth is expected to decelerate to 3¼ percent in 2009 due to
lower gas exports to Brazil, and weakening of domestic demand and falling remittances. Still Bolivia's rate of growth is the highest in
the region. Inflation has declined sharply, and is projected at 1 percent by end-2009.
…with real GDP growth expected to decelerate to 3¼ percent
in 2009, the highest growth rate in the region.

While activity slowed down with the global recession, the impact appears
to have been limited...
7

Bolivia
Haiti
Suriname
Dominica
Uruguay
Guatemala
Brazil
Ecuador
St. Vincent
Chile
Honduras

Real GDP Growth
(in percent)

6
5
4
3
2

Real GDP Growth (2009,
Fall Weo projs., in percent)

El Salvador
Barbados
Bahamas
Paraguay
Mexico

1
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

-8

The slowed down reflects lower output in the hydrocarbons sector,
mainly due to a decline in demand from Brazil...
15
10

0

4

…and weakening of domestic demand.
10

Monthly Economic Indicator
(Jan-August 2009, y/y percent change)

-4

Domestic Demand Growth
(in real terms, in percent)

8

5
6
0
4
-5
2

-10
-15

0
Hidroc.

Fin. Serv.

Agric.

Manuf.

Constr.

2005

Mining

20

Private Investment
(percent of GDP)

Latin
America

20

2007

2008

2009

Lower food prices and the slowdown in domestic demand have
contributed to a sharp decline in inflation.

Private investment remains low relative to historical averages and
to regional standards.
25

2006

CPI-inflation
(y-y in percent)

18
16
14

15

12
10

10

8
6

5

Food,
median

Headline

4

Bolivia

Non-food,
median

2
0

0
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Source: Central Bank of Bolivia and Fund staff estimates.

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

22
Figure 2. Bolivia: External Developments
The external current account surplus will narrow sharply in 2009 mainly on account of lower export prices. Central Bank’s foreign
reserves remain at historically high levels, with Bolivia turning into a net external creditor in 2008.

…mainly due to lower gas and mining exports, and lower
remittances.

Bolivia's current account surplus will decline substantially in
2009....
20

14

External Current Account
(in percent of GDP)

12

Exports and Remittances
(in percent of GDP)

18
16

10

14

Gas exports

12

8

10
6

8

4

6

Mining exports

Remittances

4

2

2

0

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2002

Natural Gas Exports
(45% of total exports in 2008)
12,000

10,000

8

160

7

150

6
millions of m3

$/000cf3
(right axis)

4,000
2006

2008

2009

Terms of Trade
(2004=100)

140

2007

2008

2009

120

2

110

1

100

0

90
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Net international reserves remain high, offering ample coverage
of monetary aggregates.

The global turmoil has also affected FDI inflows.
1500

2007

130

6,000

2005

2006

4
3

2004

2005

5

8,000

2003

2004

While terms of trade have deteriorated in 2009, they remain at
historically high levels.

The fall in gas export stems from a decline in both prices and
volumes.
14,000

2003

140

FDI
(millions of USD)

120

NIR Coverage
(in percent)

Fin. system
deposits

1200
100
900

80
60

600

40
300

Broad money

20

0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Source: Central Bank of Bolivia and Fund staff estimates.

0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

23
Figure 3. Bolivia: Fiscal Developments
Lower commodity prices and export volumes, combined with subdued domestic demand, are projected to shift
Bolivia's fiscal position roughly into balance in 2009, after three years of substantial surpluses. Public sector
debt has decreased significantly and domestic debt vulnerabilities have been reduced.
The 2009 fiscal balance reversal of 4 percent of
GDP mainly reflects a weakening in revenue...
5

…driven by automatic stabilizers and a decline in
hydrocarbon related revenue.
16

percent of GDP

percent of
GDP

Overall balance
0

Public sector revenue

12
2007
2008
2006

-5

8

-10

Non-hydrocarbon balance

-15

2009f

4

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009f

Direct taxes Indirect taxes

real revenue

Index, 2003=100

Public ent. op.
balance

…which, together with debt relief, allowed for a
significant reduction in public sector debt.

The drop in revenues comes after a period of strong
fiscal performance…
250

IDH and
royalties

120
Non-financial public sector debt

percent of GDP
100

200
80
150

60

gross

40
real expenditure

100

20
50

net

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009f

Domestic debt vulnerabilities have been reduced as
maturities have been extended...
100

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

…and foreign currency exposure has been reduced.

100
percent
of total

percent
of total

80

80

60

60
USD

less than 1 year

40

40

between 1 and 5 years

Bs, USD indexed
Bs, inflation indexed

between 5 and 10 years

20

Bs

20

more than 10 years

0

0
2005

2008

2009f

2005

2008

Source: Central Bank of Bolivia, Ministry of the Economy and Public Finances, and Fund staff estimates.

24
Figure 4. Monetary Developments
Monetary policy has been eased since July with the central bank reducing the net placements of open market
operations.
The reduction in FX inflows, which had been
partially sterilized in boom years,...

led to a rapid deceleration in monetary
aggregates' growth.

80
3.2

NIR Accumulation and Sterilization
(12-month flows in US$ billions)

2.8

Monetary aggregates y-y growth
(in percent)

70
60

Currency
issue

50

2.4

NIR flow

2.0

40
30

1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4

10
0

Net government
deposit flow

0.0
2005

2006

2007

M3*

20

OMO
paper
flow

-10
-20
2008

2003

2009

400

Nominal Exchange rate
(Bs/US$)

2006

2007

2008

2009

Net BCB monthly purchases in FX market
(in US$ millions)

300

8.0

2005

to confront the effects of the global crisis and
limit volatility in the FX market.

The central bank has maintained a de facto
peg for the last 12 months...
8.5

2004

200
100

7.5

0
7.0

-100 2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

-200

6.5

-300
6.0

-400
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

with OMOs rates falling near zero and gradually
transmitting to deposits rates.

Monetary policy has been eased since July...
35

16

Monetary Aggregates y-y growth
(in percent)

30

12

25

10
5
0

Bank lending rate

10
8

20
15

Interest Rates (in percent)

14

OMOs

6
4

M3'

Credit to
private
sector

Bank deposit
rate

2
0
Money
Base

Dec Jan Feb Mar
2008

Apr May Jun

-2

Domestic and Foreign currency deposit interest spread

-4
Jul

Aug

Sep

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia and Fund staff's estimates.

Dec Jan Feb Mar
2008

Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

25
Table 1. Bolivia: Selected Social and Economic Indicators
I. Social and Demographic Indicators
Area (sq. km)
Arable land (percent of land area, 2003)
Population (2008)
Total (million)
Annual rate of growth, 1991-2002
(percent a year)
Density (per sq. km.)
GDP per capita (US$) 2008
Population characteristics
Life expectancy at birth in years (2007)
Crude birth rate (per thousand, 2007)
Crude death rate (per thousand, 2007)
Infant mortality (per thousand live births, 2007)
Under 5 mortality rate (per thousand, 2008)
Income distribution (2005)
Gini coefficient
Distribution of urban labor force, in percent (2003)
Agriculture
Industry and mining
Services

1,084,380
2.8
9.7
3.5
8.9
1,714.3
65.5
27.3
7.6
47.6
57.0

Poverty rate in percent (2006)
Unemployment rate in percent (2006)

59.9
8.0

Access to electricity (2006)
Percent of dwellings
Urban
Rural

76.2
95.2
23.9

Access to safe water (2006)
Percent of population
Urban
Rural

86.0
96.0
69.0

Education
Adult literacy rate in percent (2007)
Net enrollment rates, in percent
Primary education (2007)
Secondary education (2007)

0.6
38.3
11.4
50.3

90.7
93.7
69.9

GDP (2008)
Billions of U.S. Dollars
Billions of bolivianos

16.6
120.7

II. Economic Indicators
Est.
2009

2010

2011

Proj.
2012

2013

2014

4.8
4.6
6.1
13.7
7.4
10.4
4.3
8.7
14.0
4.9
11.7
11.8
(In percent of GDP)

3.3
-1.5
3.5
1.0

4.0
4.1
3.3
4.0

4.0
3.4
3.7
3.5

4.0
2.7
3.5
3.5

4.0
2.8
3.5
3.5

4.0
2.8
3.5
3.5

Investment and savings
Total investment
Public sector
Private sector
Gross national savings
Public sector
Private sector

13.9
8.1
5.7
26.4
12.6
13.8

15.2
9.4
5.8
28.6
11.3
17.3

17.6
9.8
7.8
29.0
12.5
16.5

16.1
8.1
8.0
19.6
8.2
11.4

17.1
8.9
8.3
19.7
8.6
11.1

17.4
9.3
8.1
19.4
9.5
9.9

17.7
9.5
8.2
19.7
9.9
9.8

17.7
9.5
8.2
19.8
9.8
10.0

17.8
9.5
8.3
19.9
9.9
10.0

Investment/saving balances 1/
Public sector
Private sector

12.5
4.5
8.0

13.4
1.9
11.5

11.5
2.8
8.7

3.5
0.1
3.4

2.6
-0.3
2.8

2.0
0.2
1.8

2.0
0.4
1.6

2.2
0.4
1.8

2.2
0.4
1.7

2006
Income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
CPI inflation (period average)
CPI inflation (end-of-period)

Combined public sector
Revenues and grants
Of which:
Hydrocarbons related revenue
Expenditure
Current
Capital 2/
Overall balance
Of which:
Balance before nationalization costs
Non-hydrocarbons balance, before nationalization cost
Total net public debt
Total gross NFPS debt

2007

2008

(Annual percentage changes)

34.3

34.5

38.9

32.5

34.3

34.7

35.1

34.0

34.0

10.2
29.8
19.6
10.2
4.5

9.3
32.8
20.0
12.8
1.7

12.8
36.5
23.0
13.4
2.8

9.4
32.6
22.4
10.2
0.1

10.5
34.7
24.0
10.8
-0.3

10.8
34.7
23.4
11.3
0.2

10.9
34.8
23.3
11.5
0.4

10.1
33.8
22.3
11.5
0.4

10.1
33.7
22.2
11.5
0.4

4.5
-5.7
41.9
55.2

2.6
-5.9
26.8
40.9

4.3
-8.4
20.6
37.5

0.4
-8.3
19.6
39.4

-0.3
-7.7
18.3
37.4

0.2
-8.7
16.9
36.1

0.4
-8.7
15.3
35.1

0.4
-8.0
14.0
34.4

0.4
-8.1
12.7
33.5

11.3
33.6
14.5
24.4
15.2

12.0
33.5
14.8
26.0
5.8

12.1
38.8
19.0
30.0
14.7

3.5
27.4
11.2
24.9
-10.1

2.6
29.0
12.9
27.2
2.8

2.0
29.4
13.5
27.6
-0.7

2.0
29.0
13.2
27.1
-2.6

2.2
28.6
12.9
26.6
-2.0

2.2
28.1
12.6
26.3
-2.0

Gross Central Bank foreign reserves 3/ 4/
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of broad money

3,193
62.2

5,319
75.1

7,722
84.7

8,843
83.7

9,257
77.9

9,576
73.4

9,892
70.6

10,256
68.1

10,618
65.8

Exchange rates
Bolivianos/U.S. dollar (end-of-period) 5/
REER, period average (percent change)

7.93
-0.4

7.57
2.9

6.97
14.7

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

4.2
3.3
40.1
7.5

3.7
3.8
41.7
7.5

3.0
4.1
43.4
7.1

...
...

...
...

...
...

21.9
81.0

23.4
83.0

25.0
84.8

External sector
Current account 1/
Merchandise exports
Of which: natural gas
Merchandise imports
Terms of trade index (percent change)

(Changes in percent of broad money at the beginning of the period, unless otherwise specified)
Money and credit
NFA of the financial system
31.3
35.4
34.6
10.2
5.8
4.9
NDA of the financial system
-12.9
-3.7
-12.5
6.6
6.7
4.8
Of which: credit to private sector (percent of GDP)
34.7
33.1
30.3
33.0
36.1
38.5
18.5
31.7
22.2
16.8
12.5
9.7
Broad money
Interest rates (percent, end-of-period)
Yield on treasury bills in local currency
5.4
7.3
8.6
...
...
...
Yield on treasury bills in U.S. dollars
4.9
4.6
4.0
...
...
...
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Oil prices (in US dollars per barrel) 6/

11.5
64.3

13.3
71.1

16.6
97.0

17.6
61.5

19.1
76.5

20.5
79.5

Sources: Bolivian authorities; World Bank Development Indicators, and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ For historical data, the investment-savings balance, as measured in national accounts, differs from that in the balance of payments
due to adjustments in the former associated with estimations of re-exports and smuggling.
2/ Includes nationalization costs and net lending.
3/ Excludes reserves from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) and Offshore Liquidity Requirements (RAL).
4/ Foreign assets valued at market prices.
5/ Official (buy) exchange rate.
6/ Projections based on WEO's August 28 Vintage.

26
Table 2. Bolivia: Operations of the Combined Public Sector
(In percent of GDP)
2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

2010

2011

Proj.
2012

2013

2014

Total revenue and grants

34.3

34.4

38.9

32.5

34.3

34.7

35.1

34.0

34.0

Current revenue
Tax revenue
IDH and royalties
Other Taxes
Direct taxes
Of which: Corporate income tax
Indirect taxes
Of which: VAT
Of which: Excise taxes on fuel
Nontax revenue

30.9
27.8
9.4
18.4
4.7
3.1
13.6
6.8
2.2
3.1

31.1
27.8
9.0
18.8
3.8
3.0
15.0
7.1
2.3
3.3

31.5
28.5
8.5
20.0
4.5
3.7
15.5
7.4
2.1
3.0

30.4
27.4
8.6
18.8
4.6
3.9
14.3
6.5
1.9
3.0

30.1
27.0
8.2
18.8
4.4
3.7
14.4
6.7
1.8
3.0

30.4
27.4
8.6
18.8
4.6
3.9
14.2
6.6
1.8
3.0

30.2
27.3
8.6
18.7
4.6
3.9
14.1
6.6
1.7
3.0

29.9
27.0
8.4
18.5
4.6
3.9
14.0
6.5
1.7
2.9

29.7
26.7
8.3
18.4
4.6
3.9
13.8
6.4
1.6
3.0

Public enterprises operating balance

0.8

0.4

4.9

1.0

2.7

2.5

2.7

1.9

2.0

Central bank operating balance

0.7

1.3

1.2

0.1

0.5

0.7

1.1

1.1

1.1

Grants

1.8

1.6

1.2

1.0

1.1

1.1

1.1

1.1

1.1

Total spending

29.8

31.8

34.6

32.1

34.6

34.5

34.6

33.7

33.6

Current expenditure
Wages and salaries 1/
Goods and services
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Transfers
Of which: Fuel subsidies
Of which: Social programs 2/
Pensions
Other

19.6
7.9
1.8
2.5
1.5
1.0
1.5
1.2
…
3.6
2.3

20.0
9.2
2.0
2.5
1.7
0.8
2.1
0.7
0.7
3.4
0.9

22.7
8.7
2.2
2.0
1.4
0.6
6.4
3.5
2.3
3.1
0.2

22.3
9.7
2.4
2.1
1.6
0.5
4.7
1.9
2.2
3.5
-0.2

23.8
9.8
2.4
2.2
1.5
0.7
5.0
2.1
2.2
3.7
0.8

23.3
9.6
2.4
2.1
1.4
0.7
4.7
1.9
2.2
3.7
0.8

23.1
9.6
2.4
2.0
1.3
0.7
4.6
1.7
2.2
3.7
0.8

22.2
9.6
2.4
1.9
1.2
0.7
3.8
1.0
2.2
3.6
0.8

22.1
9.6
2.4
1.9
1.2
0.7
3.8
1.0
2.2
3.5
0.8

Capital expenditure
Of which: YPFB
Of which: net lending

10.2
0.0
…

11.8
0.9
…

11.9
0.0
0.8

9.8
0.7
1.4

10.8
3.1
…

11.3
1.9
…

11.5
1.8
…

11.5
1.7
…

11.5
1.6
…

Overall balance before nationalization
Of which: non-hydrocarbon balance 3/

4.5

2.6

4.3

0.4

-0.3

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.4

-5.7

-5.9

-8.4

-8.3

-7.7

-8.7

-8.7

-8.0

-8.1

Nationalization cost

0.0

0.8

1.6

0.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance after nationalization

4.5

1.7

2.8

0.1

-0.3

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.4

Financing
External
Disbursements
Amortizations
Other External
Domestic
Banking system
Of which: Central Bank
Commercial banks
Pension funds
Other domestic

-4.5
0.4
2.9
-2.5
-0.1
-4.9
-6.2
-6.2
0.1
1.3
0.1

-1.7
1.0
3.2
-2.1
-0.1
-2.8
-3.2
-3.0
-0.2
0.7
-0.3

-2.8
1.3
3.5
-2.1
0.0
-4.1
-5.4
-5.0
-0.4
0.0
1.3

-0.1
1.3
3.1
-1.8
0.0
-1.4
-2.4
-2.6
0.2
1.0
0.0

0.3
1.0
3.0
-2.0
0.0
-0.7
-0.7
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.2
1.3
2.5
-1.2
0.0
-1.5
-1.5
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
1.4
2.4
-1.1
0.0
-1.8
-1.8
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
1.5
2.5
-1.0
0.0
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
1.4
2.4
-1.0
0.0
-1.8
-1.8
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

Memorandum Items:
Overall balance of the central administration
Overall balance of subnational governments
Prefectures
Municipalities
Poverty spending
Hydrocarbon related revenue 4/
Hydrocarbon balance

1.9
1.9
0.8
1.1
13.5
10.2
10.2

1.6
1.1
0.6
0.6
14.2
9.3
8.5

-0.3
0.5
0.2
0.3
14.0
12.8
12.8

3.8
-1.6
…
…
…
14.0
9.4
8.7

…
…
…
…
…
10.5
7.4

…
…
…
…
…
10.8
8.9

…
…
…
…
…
10.9
9.1

…
…
…
…
…
10.1
8.4

…
…
…
…
…
10.1
8.5

Sources: Bolivian authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ In 2007 the expenditure on universities was reclassified from other spending into its functional classification, increasing wages and salaries by 1,056 million .Bolivianos in that year.
2/ Excludes part of Bonosol payments in 2007.
3/ Non-hydrocarbon revenue minus overall expenditure plus YPFB capital expenditure.
4/ Hydrocarbon related revenues are defined as IDH, royalties, and the operating balance of YPFB.

27
Table 3. Bolivia: Operations of the Combined Public Sector
(In Millions of Bolivianos)
2006

2007

2008

Total revenue and grants

31,473

35,428

46,953

Current revenue
Tax revenue
IDH and royalties
Other Taxes
Direct taxes
Of which: Corporate income tax
Indirect taxes
Of which: VAT
Of which: Excise taxes on fuel
Nontax revenue

28,381
25,524
8,645
16,878
4,357
2,884
12,522
6,252
2,000
2,857

32,052
28,659
9,266
19,393
3,901
3,141
15,492
7,274
2,383
3,393

38,020
34,414
10,249
24,165
5,414
4,468
18,751
8,919
2,530
3,606

732.2

384.5

668

1,297

1,692

Total spending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries 1/
Goods and services
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Transfers
Of which: Fuel subsidies
Of which: Social programs 2/
Pensions
Other

Public enterprises operating balance
Central bank operating balance
Grants

Capital expenditure
Of which: YPFB
Of which: net lending
Overall balance before nationalization
Of which: non-hydrocarbon balance 3/
Nationalization cost
Overall balance after nationalization

Est.
2009

Proj.
2012

2010

2011

2013

2014

39,944

45,629

49,667

53,617

55,563

59,318

37,392
33,663
10,524
23,139
5,607
4,775
17,532
7,963
2,364
3,729

40,002
35,973
10,921
25,051
5,877
4,963
19,174
8,881
2,459
4,029

43,541
39,254
12,348
26,906
6,527
5,549
20,379
9,464
2,558
4,286

46,213
41,675
13,144
28,530
6,967
5,930
21,564
10,030
2,661
4,538

48,818
44,013
13,760
30,252
7,452
6,336
22,800
10,619
2,767
4,805

51,846
46,675
14,572
32,103
7,983
6,773
24,120
11,246
2,878
5,171

5,969.7

1,188.9

3,538.0

3,619.3

4,074.0

3,080.6

3,555.0

1,457

126

626

933

1,649

1,867

1,996

1,695

1,505

1,237

1,463

1,573

1,681

1,796

1,920

27,372

32,767

41,754

39,406

46,008

49,381

52,948

54,981

58,602

18,000
7,230
1,649
2,318
1,358
960
1,396
1,065
…
3,284
2,123

20,594
9,431
2,031
2,616
1,749
867
2,132
688
671
3,487
897

27,402
10,521
2,680
2,386
1,681
706
7,717
4,264
2,732
3,800
297

27,345
11,944
2,972
2,544
1,936
608
5,810
2,309
2,667
4,359
-284

31,697
13,027
3,218
2,930
2,010
920
6,610
2,819
2,888
4,899
1,013

33,280
13,700
3,459
2,986
2,010
976
6,786
2,711
3,105
5,259
1,089

35,359
14,678
3,697
3,059
2,010
1,050
7,010
2,654
3,318
5,635
1,280

36,188
15,715
3,950
3,155
2,010
1,145
6,258
1,604
3,546
5,879
1,231

38,513
16,836
4,222
3,257
2,010
1,247
6,641
1,666
3,790
6,110
1,447

9,372
31
…

12,173
890
…

14,352
53
981

12,061
836
1,694

14,311
4,182
…

16,101
2,788
…

17,589
2,788
…

18,793
2,788
…

20,089
2,788
…

4,101
-5,246

2,661
-6,050

5,199
-10,191

538
-10,183

-379
-10,196

285
-12,424

669
-13,231

581
-13,071

716
-14,161

0

868

1,872

420

0

0

0

0

0

4,101

1,793

3,327

118

-379

285

669

581

716

Financing
External
Disbursements
Amortizations
Other External
Domestic
Banking system
Of which: Central Bank
Commercial banks
Pension funds
Other domestic

-4,101
370
2,695
-2,249
-75
-4,471
-5,670
-5,726
56
1,149
50

-1,793
1,063
3,268
-2,130
-75
-2,856
-3,328
-3,081
-246
741
-269

-3,327
1,612
4,232
-2,571
-50
-4,938
-6,488
-6,052
-436
0
1,550

-118
1,581
3,776
-2,194
0
-1,700
-2,954
-3,229
275
1,255
0

379
1,364
3,959
-2,596
0
-985
-985
-985
0
0
0

-285
1,879
3,607
-1,728
0
-2,164
-2,164
-2,164
0
0
0

-669
2,072
3,736
-1,663
0
-2,741
-2,741
-2,741
0
0
0

-581
2,473
4,162
-1,689
0
-3,054
-3,054
-3,054
0
0
0

-716
2,422
4,162
-1,739
0
-3,138
-3,138
-3,138
0
0
0

Memorandum Items:
Overall balance of the central administration
Overall balance of subnational government
Prefectures
Municipalities
Poverty spending
Hydrocarbon related revenue 4/
Hydrocarbon balance

1,764
1,757
734
1,023
12,384
9,378
9,347

1,633
1,154
567
587
14,618
9,601
8,711

-368
633
241
393
16,944
15,443
15,390

-2,000
…
…
…
17,248
11,558
10,722

…
…
…
…
…
13,999
9,817

…
…
…
…
…
15,497
12,709

…
…
…
…
…
16,688
13,900

…
…
…
…
…
16,440
13,652

…
…
…
…
…
17,665
14,877

Sources: Bolivian authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ In 2007 the expenditure on universities was reclassified from other spending into its functional classification, increasing wages and salaries by 1,056 million .Bolivianos in that year.
2/ Excludes part of Bonosol payments in 2007.
3/ Non-hydrocarbon revenue minus overall expenditure plus YPFB capital expenditure.
4/ Hydrocarbon related revenues are defined as IDH, royalties, and the operating balance of YPFB.

28
Table 4. Bolivia: Summary Balance of Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)

Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Exports, c.i.f.
Natural gas
of which: To Brazil
volume (mmm3 p/day)
price ($/000cf3)
To Argentina
volume (mmm3 p/day)
price ($/000cf3)
Mining
Soy - related 1/
Other
Imports, c.i.f.
Services (net)
Income (net)
Of which: interest due on external public sector debt
Of which: investment income (net)
Transfers (net)
Of which: HIPC assistance from grants

1,318
1,060
3,875
4,246
1,669
1,357
24.4
4.3
280
5.1
4.3
1,061
237
1,279
-2,814
-168
-397
-133
-389
822
44

1,591
1,004
4,458
4,860
1,971
1,606
26.9
4.6
326
4.6
5.5
1,387
277
1,225
-3,455
-189
-489
-109
-641
1,266
2

2,015
1,467
6,448
6,978
3,158
2,850
30.5
7.2
307
2.5
9.4
1,940
329
1,552
-4,980
-200
-536
-111
-678
1,284
3

620
445
4,831
5,335
1,975
1,581
22.3
5.5
394
5.0
6.1
1,763
543
1,055
-4,386
-245
-598
-98
-651
1,018
2

489
332
5,527
6,061
2,468
1,961
24.0
6.3
507
5.6
7.0
1,876
539
1,178
-5,195
-315
-609
-119
-658
1,081
0

412
356
6,029
6,613
2,777
2,258
27.0
6.5
519
5.6
7.2
2,052
541
1,243
-5,673
-393
-675
-116
-717
1,124
0

446
429
6,366
6,949
2,893
2,368
28.0
6.6
525
5.6
7.3
2,046
585
1,424
-5,937
-443
-728
-114
-767
1,187
0

509
475
6,705
7,319
3,022
2,489
29.0
6.7
533
5.6
7.4
2,051
639
1,608
-6,230
-474
-739
-120
-782
1,246
0

541
437
7,028
7,671
3,147
2,608
30.0
6.7
540
5.6
7.5
2,031
672
1,821
-6,591
-508
-733
-128
-782
1,345
0

Capital and financial account
Capital transfers 2/
Direct investment (net)
Gross investment
Disinvestment and investment abroad
Portfolio investment (net)
Public sector
Disbursements
Amortization
Other 3/
Fin system net foreign assets, excl. liquid asset requir
Nonbank private sector loans
Other, including errors and omissions

198
1,813
281
582
-301
25
-1,543
337
-1,880
0
-109
-25
-242

361
1,180
366
953
-587
-30
-1,067
410
-1,477
0
127
-52
-159

359
10
513
1,302
-789
-208
231
588
-357
0
0
-21
-160

-59
0
274
709
-435
-444
423
542
-341
222
-314
-26
28

-75
0
246
846
-600
-219
195
568
-373
0
-102
-150
-279

-93
0
298
848
-550
-230
269
517
-249
0
-160
-170
-100

-129
0
309
859
-550
-255
297
536
-239
0
-200
-180
-100

-146
0
300
850
-550
-260
354
597
-243
0
-240
-180
-120

-178
0
280
830
-550
-265
347
597
-250
0
-240
-180
-120

1,516

1,952

2,374

561

414

319

316

363

363

-1,516

-1,952

-2,374

-561

-414

-319

-316

-363

-363

11.4
33.6
-24.4
3,193
13.6

12.0
33.5
-26.0
5,319
18.5

12.1
38.8
-30.0
7,722
18.6

3.5
27.4
-24.9
8,843
24.2

2.6
29.0
-27.2
9,257
21.4

2.0
29.4
-27.6
9,576
20.3

2.0
29.0
-27.1
9,892
20.0

2.2
28.6
-26.6
10,256
19.8

2.2
28.1
-26.3
10,618
19.3

11,526

13,292

16,602

17,627

19,086

20,520

21,928

23,430

25,045

Financing

2010

2011

Proj.
2012

2007

Overall balance

2008

Est.
2009

2006

2013

2014

Memorandum items:
Current account (percent of GDP)
Merchandise exports (percent of GDP)
Merchandise imports (percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves (end-of-period)
(In months of imports of goods and services)
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding reexports.
2/ In 2006 includes effect of MDRI debt relief from the IMF and the World Bank equivalent to US$ 1804.3 million.
In 2007 includes effect of MDRI relief from IADB equivalent to US$ 1099 million.

3/ Includes SRD allocation in 2009.

29
Table 5. Bolivia: Central Bank of Bolivia 1/
2005

2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

Proj.
2010

(Flows in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net international reserves 2/
(Flows in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial intermediaries
Of which: Open market operations (increase -) 3/
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net) 2/
Currency issue

4,105
503

10,270
1,289

15,491
1,999

17,449
2,400

2,372
340

2,788
414

-2,208
-1,543
-604
-168
8
-69

-7,676
-5,725
-1,620
-1,171
5
-336

-10,162
-2,993
-6,131
-5,397
6
-1,044

-14,711
-6,055
-8,974
-6,745
-12
329

-2,018
-3,489
1,078
5,130
8
385

-1,224
-985
-244
-2,147
5
0

1,897

2,594

5,329

2,940

354

1,564

(Stocks in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net international reserves
(Stocks in millions of U.S. dollars)

12,785
1,568

24,291
3,050

40,705
5,252

56,215
7,732

57,196
8,206

59,984
8,606

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial intermediaries
Of which: Open market operations 3/
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities
Other items (net)

-6,605
236
627
-690
-220
-7,248

-15,517
-6,952
-1,455
-1,868
-212
-6,898

-26,602
-9,337
-7,906
-7,290
-207
-9,152

-39,172
-14,096
-17,461
-14,469
-214
-7,401

-39,799
-15,064
-18,016
-10,828
-1,967
-4,753

-41,023
-16,049
-18,260
-12,975
-1,962
-4,753

6,180

8,774

14,103

17,043

17,397

18,961

Currency issue

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period currency issue)
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial private sector
Of which: Open market operations (increase -) 3/
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net)
Currency issue
Memorandum items:
Currency issue (average stock in percent of GDP)
Net international reserves 4/
NIR coverage of broad money (percent) 4/

95.8

166.2

176.6

123.7

13.9

16.0

-51.6
-36.0
-14.1
-3.9
0.2
-1.6

-124.2
-92.6
-26.2
-19.0
0.1
-5.4

-115.8
-34.1
-69.9
-61.5
0.1
-11.9

-104.3
-42.9
-63.6
-47.8
-0.1
2.3

-11.8
-20.5
6.3
30.1
0.0
2.3

-7.0
-5.7
-1.4
-12.3
0.0
0.0

44.3

42.0

60.7

20.9

2.1

9.0

5.6
1,714
39.4

7.1
3,178
61.9

9.8
5,319
75.1

12.7
7,722
84.7

14.3
…
…

14.8
…
…

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Stocks and flows in foreign currency are valued at accounting exchange rates for 2005 and at the beginning of period exchange rate for
2006 onwards.
2/ Includes valuation adjustments.
3/ Includes direct placements to individuals
4/ All foreign assets valued at market prices.

30
Table 6. Bolivia: Financial System Survey 1/ 2/
2005

2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

Proj.
2010

(Flows in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net short-term foreign assets
(Flows in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net)
Broad money
Liabilities in domestic currency
Foreign currency deposits

6,249
766

10,892
1,368

14,415
1,860

18,556
2,552

6,487
931

4,251
610

-1,998
-2,134
1,068
-390
-543

-4,469
-5,760
1,958
-105
-562

-1,502
-3,482
4,400
359
-2,779

-6,682
-6,675
4,783
-661
-4,128

4,184
-3,026
3,017
251
3,943

4,948
-985
7,509
5
-1,582

4,251
3,441
810

6,423
5,578
845

12,913
11,511
1,402

11,875
10,382
1,493

10,671
4,985
5,686

9,199
5,743
3,456

(Stocks in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net short-term foreign assets
(Stocks in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities
Other items (net)
Broad money
Liabilities in domestic currency
Foreign currency deposits

19,496
2,391

31,494
3,954

46,823
6,042

62,959
8,660

67,707
9,714

71,959
10,324

15,269
2,361
30,778
-3,326
-14,544

9,212
-4,884
32,171
-3,368
-14,707

6,765
-7,760
36,537
-3,006
-19,007

564
-13,181
38,926
-3,491
-21,689

5,949
-13,667
40,547
-4,864
-16,067

10,897
-14,652
48,056
-4,859
-17,649

34,765
10,206
24,559

40,706
15,784
24,922

53,588
27,295
26,293

63,523
38,411
25,112

73,657
43,142
30,515

82,856
48,885
33,971

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Net short-term foreign assets

20.7

31.3

35.4

34.6

10.2

5.8

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net)

-6.6
-7.1
3.5
-1.3
-1.8

-12.9
-16.6
5.6
-0.3
-1.6

-3.7
-8.6
10.8
0.9
-6.8

-12.5
-12.5
8.9
-1.2
-7.7

6.6
-4.8
4.7
0.4
6.2

6.7
-1.3
10.2
0.0
-2.1

Broad money
Liabilities in domestic currency
Foreign currency deposits

14.1
11.4
2.7

18.5
16.0
2.4

31.7
28.3
3.4

22.2
19.4
2.8

16.8
7.8
9.0

12.5
7.8
4.7

41.7
39.2
66.8

38.7
4.5
33.9
96.3

45.2
13.6
33.1
115.7

48.2
6.5
30.3
131.9

55.2
4.2
33.0
117.6

59.2
18.5
36.1
110.1

84.2
92.6

76.2
86.9

65.0
79.1

52.6
66.3

53.0
69.1

52.0
69.2

Memorandum items:
Broad money (average stock in percent of GDP)
Credit to private sector (annual percentage change))
Credit to private sector (average stock in percent of GDP)
Financial system NFA coverage of deposits (percent)
Dollarization (end-period stocks)
Foreign currency and dollar-indexed deposits
Foreign currency and dollar indexed credit
Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The financial system comprises the central bank; commercial banks and nonbanks; and the National Financial Institution of Bolivia and FONDESIF, which are
state-owned second-tier banks.
2/ Stocks and flows in foreign currency are valued at accounting exchange rates for 2005 and at the beginning of period exchange rate for 2006 onwards.

31
Table 7. Bolivia: Consolidated Commercial Banks and Non-bank Depository Institutions 1/
2005

2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

Proj.
2010

(Flows in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net short-term foreign assets
(Flow in millions of U.S. dollars)

2,144
263

622
78

-1,076
-139

1,107
152

4,115
590

1,463
210

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net position with the central bank
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net)

378
-590
1,068
614
-398
-315

3,383
-35
1,958
1,842
-110
-272

8,884
-490
4,400
4,753
354
-134

8,077
-619
4,783
5,973
-650
-1,409

6,281
462
3,017
27
243
2,532

6,290
0
7,509
363
0
-1,582

Deposits
Local currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits

2,522
1,712
810

4,005
3,160
845

7,808
6,406
1,402

9,185
7,692
1,493

10,397
4,711
5,686

7,753
4,297
3,456

(Stocks in millions of Bolivianos, unless otherwise indicated)
Net short-term foreign assets
(Stock in millions of U.S. dollars)

6,712
823

7,203
904

6,118
789

6,744
928

10,511
1,508

11,974
1,718

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net position with the central bank
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities
Other items (net)

22,459
2,125
30,778
250
-3,106
-7,588

25,491
2,068
32,171
2,128
-3,156
-7,721

34,352
1,577
36,537
6,883
-2,798
-7,846

40,972
914
38,926
13,137
-3,277
-8,729

47,064
1,397
40,547
14,082
-2,897
-6,066

53,354
1,397
48,056
14,445
-2,897
-7,648

Deposits
Local currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits

29,171
4,611
24,559

32,694
7,771
24,922

40,470
14,177
26,293

47,715
22,604
25,112

57,575
27,060
30,515

65,328
31,357
33,971

(Changes in percent of deposits at the beginning of the period)
Net short-term foreign assets

8.2

2.1

-3.3

2.7

8.6

2.5

1.4
-2.2
4.1
2.3
-1.5
-1.2

11.6
-0.1
6.7
6.3
-0.4
-0.9

27.2
-1.5
13.5
14.5
1.1
-0.4

20.0
-1.5
11.8
14.8
-1.6
-3.5

13.2
1.0
6.3
0.1
0.5
5.3

10.9
0.0
13.0
0.6
0.0
-2.7

9.6
6.5
3.1

13.7
10.8
2.9

23.9
19.6
4.3

22.7
19.0
3.7

21.8
9.9
11.9

13.5
7.5
6.0

Memorandum items:
Credit to private sector (average stock in percent of GDP)
NFA coverage of dollar deposits (percent)

39.2
23.0

33.9
22.0

33.1
15.1

30.3
14.1

33.0
18.3

36.1
18.3

U.S. dollar and dollar-indexed deposits (in percent of total deposits)
U.S. dollar and dollar indexed credit (in percent of total credit)

84.2
92.6

76.2
86.9

65.0
79.1

52.6
66.3

53.0
69.1

52.0
69.2

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Net position with the central bank
Net medium- and long-term foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other items (net)
Deposits
Local currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Stocks and flows in foreign currency are valued at accounting exchange rates for 2005 and at the beginning of period exchange rate

for 2006 onwards.

32
Table 8. Bolivia: Selected Vulnerability Indicators
2005
Reserve adequacy

2006

2007

2008

Sep
2009

(In US$ million, unless otherwise indicated)

Net international reserves 1/
NIR coverage, in percent of:
Dollar deposits
Total deposits
Broad money
In months of imports of goods and services

1,714

3,178

5,319

7,722

8,453

56.9
47.9
39.4
5.9

101.6
77.4
61.9
9.2

156.8
101.9
75.1
11.2

223.6
117.7
98.1
18.1

193.1
102.3
80.0
16.9

Net foreign assets of the financial system
NFA coverage, in percent of:
Dollar deposits
Total deposits
Broad money

2,391

3,954

6,042

8,660

9,664

79.4
66.8
56.1

126.4
96.3
77.4

178.1
115.7
87.4

250.7
131.9
99.1

220.7
123.1
97.5

Total gross NFPS debt
Domestic
External

80.4
30.7
49.6

55.2
27.1
28.2

40.9
24.9
16.1

37.5
23.2
14.3

39.4
24.1
15.3

Total net NFPS debt
Private external debt

71.1
13.4

41.9
10.2

26.8
9.3

20.6
7.7

19.6
7.3

-75.4

-31.4

-5.2

9.3

…

23.4
-8.9
38.9
19.5

33.0
-5.7
43.1
27.4

30.0
-5.9
44.2
31.1

40.6
-8.4
49.0
30.1

30.9
-8.3
49.9
36.5

11.3
22.5
33.8
14.7
6.4
30.7

8.7
16.2
24.9
13.3
13.3
33.9

5.6
10.7
16.3
12.6
21.2
35.2

4.3
7.1
11.4
13.7
20.3
43.4

4.1
5.6
9.7
13.4
19.7
48.3

84.2
2.1
13.7

76.2
3.3
20.5

65.0
4.2
30.9

52.6
5.0
42.4

55.8
0.0
44.2

-2.2
3,578

4.5
4,105

2.6
5,222

4.3
6,563

0.4
7,853

934
928

1,099
1,193

1,371
1,744

1,409
2,064

1,731
2,355

Debt ratios 2/

Net International Investment Position
Commodity dependency
Hydrocarbon revenue (in percent of total revenues)1/
Non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance (in percent of GDP)1/
Gas exports (in percent of total exports)
Mining exports (in percent of total exports)

(In percent of GDP)

Banking sector indicators 3/
Nonperforming loans (in percent of total loans)
Restructured loans (in percent of total loans)
Nonperforming and restructured loans (in percent of total loans)
Capital adequacy ratio
Profits after tax (in percent of equity)
Cash and short-term investments as percent of total assets

(In percent)

Composition of bank deposits
Dollar deposits
Inflation-indexed deposits
Local currency deposits
Memorandum items:
Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) 2/
Total financial system deposits (US$ million)
of which:
Sight deposits
Savings deposits
Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Foreign assets valued at market prices.
2/ Debt and fiscal figures are end-2009 projections. Fiscal balance excludes nationalization costs.
3/ As of October 31, 2009.

33
Table 9. Bolivia: Millennium Development Goals
First
Observation

Target
2004

2005

2006

2007

2015

41.2 (1990)

...

36.7

37.7

…

24.1

38.3 (1990)

25.5
(2003)

...

…

55.4 (1992)

94.0
79.5

94.5
77.8

92.7
75.6

93.7
…

100.0
100.0

6.6 (1992)
3.4 (1992)

...
...

0.3
-0.4

-0.6
-1.5

...
...

0.0
0.0

89 (1990)
68 (1994)

...
...

...
84.5

…
82.6

47.6
…

30.0
95.0

416 (1990)
27 (1995)

...
59.6

290
61.9

…
65.0

…
…

104
70.0

1.8 (1990)

13.4

19.3

19.2

…

13.0

7.5 (1990)
52.6 (1995)

4.1
80.3

5.5
78.5

5.2
82.9

…
…

2.0
95.0

57.5 (1992)
28 (1992)

72.3
41.6

71.7
43.5

73.1
55.7

…
…

78.5
64.0

2.7 (1990)
0.1 (1995)

26.9
4.4

33.4
5.2

37.9
6.2

41.3
10.5

…
…

Goal 1. Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a
day.
Population below US$1 a day (in percent)
Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people suffering hunger
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 3)

19.0

Goal 2. Achieve Universal Primary Education
Target 3. Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 8
Goal 3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
Target 4. Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all
levels of education by 2015.
Gender disparities at completion of primary education (percent)
Gender disparities at completion of secondary education (percent)
Goal 4. Reduce Child Mortality
Target 5. Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under five mortality rate
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization against measles (percent of children under 12-months)
Goal 5. Improve Maternal Health
Target 6. Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (percent)
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria, and Other Diseases
Target 7. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS
HIV prevalence, total (percent ages 15-24)
Target 8. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases
Incidence of malaria (per 1,000 people)
Incidence of tuberculosis cases cured (percent of diagnosed)
Target 10. halve by 2015 proportion of people without access to safe drinking water
Access to potable water (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (percent of population)
Goal 8. Develop a global Partnership for Development
Target 18. Make available new technologies, especially information and communications
Mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Sources: Bolivian authorities; and World Bank Development Indicators.

34
ANNEX 1. SUMMARY OF ANNEXES
The full annexes to this report may be viewed in CyberDocs on the Fund’s intranet and on
the secure extranet for Executive Directors and member country officials.
Fund relations
As of November 30, 2009, Bolivia did not have any outstanding purchases or loans. The
latest SBA expired on March 31, 2006. The last Article IV consultation was completed by
the Executive Board on January 14, 2009. The Bolivian exchange rate regime has been
reclassified from a crawling peg to a stabilized arrangement against the U.S. dollar. Bolivia
has received wide-ranging TA in recent years. Mr. Luis Breuer has been the IMF regional
resident representative (based in Lima, Peru) since June 2009.
Relations with the World Bank Group
A new Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for FY10-11 was discussed and approved by the Board
on June 2, 2009. The ISN has a total envelope of US$137 million of IDA resources. The
lending program amounts to US$90 million in predefined operations while US$47 million
has been left available for flexible use, to respond to the unforeseen needs, support the
Government’s efforts to stem the impact of the global crisis, and to reduce extreme poverty.
The World Bank´s portfolio in Bolivia comprises 11 investment projects for a total amount of
US$302.8 million of which US$190.6 remain undisbursed.
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank
As of November 30, 2009, Bolivia’s outstanding debt to the IDB was approximately
US$562 millions with undisbursed approved funds for US$587.8 millions. Consistent with
the application of the Debt Sustainability Framework and after the last round of debt relief,
new IDB lending to Bolivia will be following newly adopted operational guidelines for
concessional funds under the Fund of Special Operations performance-based allocation
system. The Bank’s 2009 operative program contains a portfolio of sovereign guaranteed
operations of 6 loans for a total amount of US$191 millions for the year, concentrated in
water, housing and agricultural productivity sectors. An additional of 9 loans for
US$200 millions has been identified and are already in the Bank’s lending pipeline for the
2010 cycle.
Statistical issues
Data provision to the Fund has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance.
A data ROSC mission in early 2007 confirmed advances in recent years, and reiterated the
existence of shortcomings that might hamper the formulation of appropriate policies. Bolivia
has participated in the GDDS since November 2000.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BOLIVIA
External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund1
Approved by Antônio Furtado and Michele Shannon
December 23, 2009
Following MDRI debt relief, Bolivia’s public debt sustainability has continued to improve as
a result of overall fiscal surpluses, and the risk of debt distress is low. Debt ratios continue
to display ample margins with respect to risk thresholds and are expected to decline further
under the baseline scenario. Debt service is projected to remain low, reflecting
predominantly long maturities of remaining stocks of both domestic and foreign debt. The
path of debt ratios would deteriorate somewhat under standard stress tests, but would
remain within manageable bounds over the medium- and long run.
Background
1.
Bolivia’s gross public debt (domestic and external) has fallen significantly over
the last several years, benefiting from the MDRI and fiscal surpluses. Between 2004 and
2008, gross debt has fallen by 50 percentage points of GDP to 38 percent of GDP in 2008.
While multilateral external debt has fallen sharply, bilateral external debt has increased,
driven by higher lending from South American countries, mainly Venezuela.
2.
Bolivia’s changing debt structure and the accumulation of significant deposits
have further reduced debt vulnerabilities. Since 2005, average maturities have been
successfully extended and foreign currency exposure has been reduced. Moreover, with the
accumulation of deposits of the non-financial public sector in the financial system—
amounting to about 21 percent of GDP at present—the solvency of the public sector
measured by the net public debt (i.e., gross debt minus those deposits) has improved even
more significantly. On account of declining gross debt, net debt ratios would reach very low
levels during the projection period.

1

Since Bolivia is an IDA blend country, this DSA was not conducted jointly with the World Bank.

2
Baseline Scenario
3.

The main assumptions of the baseline scenario for the period 2009–29 are:



Average annual real GDP growth: 4 percent until 2029. Potential growth is subject
to significant upside risks, as discussed in Box 7 of the Staff Report.



Average deflator inflation: 2.4 percent per year on average until 2014, in line with
the recent medium-term staff projections, and would increase to 3.5 percent over the
long term.



Export and import growth: in line with the medium-term staff projections and the
assumption of stable import and export ratios to GDP over the long term.



Financing strategy: commercial debt is expected to remain nil, with CAF expected to
remain as the main source of financing. Despite the overall balanced fiscal position,
net external financing flows are expected to be positive until 2014. Likewise,
complex intergovernmental fiscal relations may require some additional domestic
financing. The excess funds at the level of the non-financial sector will continue to be
accumulated as deposits.



Average concessionality of the public sector borrowing: projected to evolve, in the
medium-term, based on projected disbursements of official loans.

Bolivia’s public and external debt is expected to remain sustainable throughout the
projection period, and the risk of debt distress is low. Bolivia is classified as a medium
performer in terms of its policy and institutional capacity, measured by the three-year
average of the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) scores. All
the debt burden
Indicative Policy-Dependent Debt Thresholds for Medium Performers
indicators for Bolivia are
PV of debt, percent of
Debt service, percent of
well below the specific
Exports GDP Revenue
Exports
Revenue
indicative thresholds for Bolivia, 2009
46
14
44
5
5
Indicative thresholds
150
40
250
20
30
medium performers.
Hence, Bolivia’s risk of
debt distress is low—an assessment that would hold even under significant stress tests. After
a projected small deficit in 2010, the fiscal position would return to small surpluses in 2011–
2014, with an average overall surplus of about 0.4 percent of GDP, and would remain at this
level throughout the projection period. Under the baseline scenario, Bolivia’s indebtedness
and debt service levels would remain very manageable. Specifically, the gross non-financial
sector public debt-to-GDP ratio—39 percent in 2009—is projected to decline gradually to
34 percent by 2014, and to 14 percent in 2029. A temporary increase in 2009 is due to net
external financing and additional domestic bond issuance despite an overall surplus. The

3
total stock of external debt (public and private) is projected to fall to about 22 percent of
GDP by 2014, and to stabilize around 9 percent of GDP by 2029.
Stress Tests
4.
Standard stress tests suggest that the sustainability of Bolivia’s public and
external indebtedness is resilient to a series of shocks. Under the most extreme stress test
to external debt—a combined shock to debt concessionality, GDP growth, export growth,
and external inflation—the ratio of the NPV of debt to GDP deteriorates somewhat and
eventually returns to a downward trajectory. In all cases, it would remain well below risky
levels. Flow indicators also remain manageable under all stress tests. For public debt, the
biggest risk stems from a temporary or permanently lower GDP growth, however, tests
indicate that ratios remain within manageable levels.

4.8
3.5
-6.8
-10.0
13.7
-0.1
...

4.6
4.8
0.0
-8.3
7.4
0.1
...

26.5
10.5
...
...
9.8
76.9
80.8
…
35.3
37.0
9.2

-14.3
-11.0
-5.1
34.4
1.6
29.3
-4.9
-1.8
0.6
-2.4
-3.0
-1.0
0.8
0.0
-1.8
0.0
-3.3

40.9
25.0

2007

6.1
5.7
-2.7
-14.5
10.4
0.2
...

36.3
20.4
11.6
...
3.6
93.3
96.4
30.9
21.9
22.6
-2.9

-3.5
-10.9
-6.4
38.9
1.2
32.5
-5.6
-2.1
0.3
-2.4
-3.5
1.0
1.6
0.0
-0.5
0.0
7.5

37.5
21.6

2008

…

3.8
4.1
-2.0
-4.0
7.5
0.1

-0.1

Average

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Non-financial public sector gross debt.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

o/w external 3/

Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)

PV of public sector debt
29.9
12.1
...
...
5.6
87.1
92.1
…
22.4
23.6
18.1

-25.1
-20.0
-7.0
34.3
1.8
27.3
-10.6
-4.9
-1.2
-3.7
-5.6
-2.4
0.0
0.0
-2.4
0.0
-5.2

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

Other Sustainability Indicators

55.2
37.4

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2006

Actual

…

2.3
1.1
2.9
7.9
3.6
0.1

5.4

Standard
Deviation

3.3
6.1
8.9
3.1
-1.5
-0.1
8.3

39.5
22.2
13.9
...
5.0
121.4
125.3
44.1
14.7
15.2
-4.6

1.9
-0.8
-2.7
32.5
1.0
29.8
1.8
1.1
2.3
-1.2
0.7
0.1
0.3
0.0
-0.2
0.0
2.7

39.4
22.1

2009

Estimate

4.0
5.7
2.6
...
4.1
0.1
10.6

39.4
23.3
15.7
...
5.6
114.9
118.7
47.2
13.3
13.8
0.1

-2.0
-2.8
-1.9
34.3
1.1
32.4
-0.8
-0.3
1.2
-1.5
-0.5
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-0.2
0.0
0.9

37.4
21.3

2010

4.0
6.0
3.3
...
3.4
0.0
13.3

39.2
24.1
17.0
...
4.8
112.9
116.6
50.6
12.5
12.9
-1.0

-1.3
-2.7
-2.3
34.7
1.1
32.4
-0.4
-0.1
1.3
-1.4
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

36.1
21.0

2011

Table 1a.Bolivia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2006-2029
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

4.0
6.0
3.9
...
2.8
0.0
15.6

39.1
24.8
18.2
...
4.4
111.4
115.0
53.5
12.0
12.3
-1.5

-1.0
-2.7
-2.5
35.1
1.1
32.6
-0.2
0.0
1.4
-1.4
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

35.1
20.9

2012

4.0
6.0
4.0
...
2.7
0.0
15.2

39.4
25.9
19.6
...
4.4
115.7
119.5
59.6
11.9
12.3
-1.6

-0.7
-2.5
-2.3
34.0
1.1
31.7
-0.2
0.0
1.4
-1.4
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8

34.4
20.9

2013

4.0
6.1
3.9
...
2.8
0.0
13.9

39.4
26.7
20.8
...
4.3
116.0
119.9
63.4
11.8
12.1
-1.5

-0.8
-2.5
-2.3
34.0
1.1
31.6
-0.2
0.0
1.3
-1.3
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

33.5
20.8

...
3.5
0.0
10.8

...
3.5
0.0
12.4

...
2.4
0.0
12.8

20.6
15.4
13.0
...
3.3
63.7
66.2
41.9
11.7
12.1
-0.2

-1.4
-1.4
-1.7
32.3
1.2
30.6
0.2
0.4
1.0
-0.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

14.2
9.0

2029

4.0
8.3
7.1

34.3
25.3
21.2
...
3.9
96.5
99.9
61.7
10.4
10.7
0.4

-2.2
-2.3
-1.9
35.6
1.2
33.7
-0.4
-0.1
0.9
-1.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

24.3
15.3

2019

4.0
6.5
1.8

3.9
6.0
4.4

-2.3

Projections
2009-14
Average
2014

3.5
0.0
...

...

4.0
7.1
3.4

-1.8

2015-29
Average

4

5
Table 2a.Bolivia: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2009-2029

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012 2013

2014

2019

2029

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

39

39

39

39

39

39

34

21

39
39
39

41
38
40

43
38
40

45
37
40

48
37
41

50
37
42

52
28
44

47
7
50

39
39
39
39
39

41
46
44
50
49

43
53
49
50
49

45
53
50
50
48

47
53
51
51
48

48
52
51
51
48

50
45
48
47
41

45
28
38
32
25

121

115

113

111

116

116

97

64

121
121
121

120
112
116

124
109
115

129
106
115

140
109
121

146
108
124

145
79
123

147
22
155

121
121
121
121
121

120
135
129
145
144

125
154
142
143
140

128
151
142
142
138

137
155
149
149
142

141
154
151
150
141

139
126
136
133
116

138
86
116
100
78

15

13

12

12

12

12

10

12

15
15
15

13
13
13

13
12
13

12
12
12

13
12
12

13
12
12

12
10
12

17
10
17

15
15
15
15
15

14
13
14
15
13

13
13
13
15
14

13
14
13
14
13

13
14
13
14
13

13
13
13
14
13

12
12
12
13
11

17
14
16
16
13

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2010
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2010
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2010
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2010
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2010-2011
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2010
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2010

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

11.5
20.4

13.3
15.3

4.6
10.3
5.4
13.9
19.8
...
32.7
0.4
0.2
0.2
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
34.1
28.0
31.8
0.1
-0.5

25.3
16.1
-13.0
-19.0
-13.6
-6.1
37.3
31.2
-9.5
-1.7
2.1
-2.1
-3.3
1.8
-1.5
-3.6
5.9
-0.1

2007

Actual

16.6
24.9
2.0

6.1
17.7
5.3
40.1
37.1
...
37.7
0.5
0.2
0.2
...
...

19.4
46.3
11.6
27.8
30.9
19.0
16.9
18.8
-0.8
-9.8

22.0
14.3
-3.3
-19.3
-13.1
-7.6
41.8
34.2
-7.7
-1.2
2.3
-2.2
-4.0
1.1
-1.2
-3.8
15.9
0.0

2008

3.8

-2.9

2.3
8.4
8.8
14.8
14.5
...

1.6

-6.4

3.8
6.3
7.9
18.6
10.8
...

6.9

Standard
Deviation

-6.4

Historical
Average

17.6
6.2
2.4
2.6

3.3
2.8
5.5
-23.6
-10.0
8.3
31.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.3
28.3

21.2
70.3
13.9
46.1
44.1
8.2
5.5
5.3
-0.4
-5.1

22.6
15.3
0.6
-7.0
-4.5
-1.1
30.1
29.0
-5.8
-0.8
2.4
-2.9
0.5
1.1
-0.7
…
7.6
0.0

2009

19.1
8.3
3.0
3.1

4.0
4.1
5.1
13.2
17.3
10.6
33.2
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
29.5

22.4
71.1
15.7
49.8
47.2
7.4
4.9
4.6
0.0
-2.7

21.9
15.2
-0.7
-4.6
-3.4
-0.1
31.5
31.4
-5.7
-1.1
2.4
-1.4
0.2
1.1
-0.8
…
3.9
0.0

2010

20.5
7.5
3.5
2.6

4.0
3.4
6.1
8.4
9.3
13.3
33.6
0.5
0.2
0.3
1.6
33.7

23.3
73.3
17.0
53.6
50.6
7.3
4.6
4.4
0.1
-2.7

21.7
15.4
-0.2
-3.7
-2.9
0.2
31.8
31.9
-5.5
-1.1
2.4
-1.2
0.4
1.2
-0.8
…
3.5
0.0

2011

21.9
6.9
4.0
2.4

4.0
2.8
6.7
5.2
4.8
15.6
34.0
0.5
0.2
0.3
1.6
36.6

24.0
76.9
18.2
58.1
53.5
7.3
4.5
4.1
0.1
-2.9

21.6
15.8
0.0
-3.8
-3.0
0.1
31.3
31.3
-5.4
-1.1
2.4
-1.4
0.5
1.4
-0.8
…
3.8
0.0

2012

Projections

23.4
6.8
4.6
2.8

4.0
2.7
6.7
5.6
5.4
15.2
32.9
0.6
0.3
0.3
1.6
35.4

25.1
81.3
19.6
63.5
59.6
6.9
4.2
4.0
0.0
-3.2

21.8
16.3
0.1
-3.9
-3.1
0.0
30.9
30.9
-5.3
-1.1
2.2
-1.3
0.5
1.4
-0.8
…
4.0
0.0

2013

25.0
6.9
5.2
2.6

4.0
2.8
6.7
5.1
6.1
13.9
32.9
0.6
0.3
0.3
1.6
35.5

26.0
85.4
20.8
68.6
63.4
6.9
4.4
4.0
0.0
-3.1

21.8
16.6
0.0
-3.7
-3.1
0.3
30.4
30.7
-5.4
-1.0
2.0
-1.2
0.5
1.4
-0.8
…
3.7
0.0

2014

2.7

7.1

3.9
3.1
6.1
2.3
5.5
12.8

2009-2014
Average

36.2
7.7
7.7
1.2

4.0
3.5
7.6
7.8
7.9
12.4
34.4
0.7
0.4
0.3
1.5
42.4

24.8
81.1
21.2
69.5
61.7
7.6
5.8
5.2
0.2
-1.9

16.0
12.4
-1.0
-3.1
-2.9
0.4
30.5
30.9
-4.4
-0.8
1.1
-0.8
0.6
1.2
-0.6
…
2.1
0.0

2019

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
0
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/

4.8
14.9
4.1
32.7
20.7
...
32.5
0.5
0.2
0.3
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
23.5
16.4
19.1
-0.1
11.3

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio
Key macroeconomic assumptions

38.4
28.2
-24.6
-24.3
-13.3
-7.7
37.8
30.0
-7.1
-2.6
1.5
-2.4
-8.5
2.1
-2.5
-8.2
-0.3
0.0

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2006

Table 3a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2006-2029 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

75.9
7.7
9.9
0.2

4.0
3.5
7.7
7.8
7.9
10.8
31.1
1.2
0.9
0.3
1.3
56.1

14.7
47.7
13.0
42.2
41.9
5.5
4.6
4.6
0.2
-1.6

9.1
7.4
-0.5
-2.1
-2.1
0.7
30.9
31.6
-2.9
-0.3
0.1
-0.4
0.3
0.7
-0.4
…
1.7
0.0

2029

0.9

7.7

1.4
46.4

4.0
3.5
7.6
7.8
7.9
11.8
33.4

-0.7

-4.0

-2.7

2015-2029
Average

6

7
Table 3b.Bolivia: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2009-2029
(In percent)

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012
2013

2014

2019

2029

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline

14

16

17

18

20

21

21

13

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009-2029 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009-2029 2

14
14

11
17

7
19

3
21

0
23

-3
25

-21
28

-50
22

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 5/

14
14
14
14
14
14

16
18
17
18
17
22

18
23
19
22
19
24

19
24
20
23
20
25

20
25
21
24
21
27

21
26
23
25
23
28

21
24
23
23
22
28

12
13
13
13
13
17

Baseline

46

50

54

58

64

69

69

42

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009-2029 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009-2029 2

46
46

35
53

23
59

11
67

1
75

-10
82

-70
91

-161
70

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 5/

46
46
46
46
46
46

49
62
49
59
54
49

53
81
53
70
56
53

57
86
57
73
60
57

62
91
62
78
65
62

66
96
66
82
69
66

66
89
66
77
68
66

38
47
38
41
39
38

PV of debt-to-exports ratio

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline

44

47

51

54

60

63

62

42

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009-2029 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009-2029 2

44
44

33
50

21
56

10
61

1
70

-9
76

-62
81

-160
69

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 5/

44
44
44
44
44
44

48
54
50
56
52
66

52
68
56
66
57
70

55
69
59
68
59
74

61
75
65
73
65
82

64
78
69
76
69
86

61
69
66
68
64
82

40
41
43
41
41
54

Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline

5

5

5

5

4

4

6

5

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009-2029 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009-2029 2

5
5

5
5

4
5

3
5

2
5

2
4

-1
6

-9
7

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 5/

5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5

5
6
5
5
5
5

4
6
4
5
5
4

4
5
4
5
4
4

4
6
4
5
4
4

6
8
6
7
6
6

4
6
4
5
4
4

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline

5

5

4

4

4

4

5

5

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009-2029 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009-2029 2

5
5

5
5

4
4

3
4

2
4

2
4

-1
6

-9
7

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2010-2011 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 5/

5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
7

5
5
5
5
5
6

4
5
5
5
4
6

4
5
4
4
4
6

4
5
4
4
4
6

5
6
6
6
6
7

5
5
5
5
5
6

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

8

Figure 1.Bolivia: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2009-2029 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Growth

60

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
50

40

30

20

10

0
2009

2011

160

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2021

2023

2025

2027

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2009

2011

18

2013

2015

2017

2019

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2019.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

2029

9
Figure 2. Bolivia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt under
Alternatives Scenarios, 2009-2029 1/
a. Debt Accumulation

3.5
3.0
2.5

18

45

16

40

14

35

12

30

2.0

10

1.5

8
6

1.0

4

0.5

2

0.0

0
2009

2014

2019

Rate of Debt Accumulation

2024

2029

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

25
20
15
10
5
0
2009

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

2014

2019

2024

2029

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

160

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

300

140

250

120
200

100

150

80
60

100

40
50

20
0

0
2009

2014

2019

2024

2029

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

25

2009

2014

2019

2024

2029

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

35
30

20

25
15

20
15

10

10
5

5
0

0
2009

2014

2019
Baseline

2024

2029

2009

Most extreme shock 1/

2014

2019

2024
Threshold

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2019. In figure b. it corresponds to a One-time depreciation
shock; in c. to a Terms shock; in d. to a One-time depreciation shock; in e. to a Exports shock and in figure f. to a One-time
depreciation shock

2029

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BOLIVIA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
December 23, 2009

Contents

Page

1.

Fund Relations ...................................................................................................................2

2.

Relations with the World Bank ..........................................................................................5

3.

Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank .....................................................7

4.

Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................9

2
APPENDIX 1. BOLIVIA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of November 30, 2009)
I. Membership Status: Joined December 27, 1945; accepted its obligations under Article
VIII on June 5, 1967. The exchange system is free of restrictions on current international
payments and transfers.
II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III. SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings
IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
V.

SDR Million
171.50
162.64
8.87

Percent of Quota
100.00
94.83
5.17

SDR Million
164.13
164.91

Percent of Allocation
100.00
100.47

None

Financial Arrangements:
Type
Stand-By
PRGF
PRGF

Approval
date
4/02/03
9/18/98
12/19/94

Expiration
date
3/31/06
6/07/02
9/09/98

Amount approved
(SDR million)
145.78
100.96
100.96

Amount drawn
(SDR million)
111.50
63.86
100.96

VI. Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2009

2010

2011

2012

Charges/Interest

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

Total

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Principal

3
VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

I.

Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed
by all creditors (US$ Million)1/
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date

II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR Million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income2/
Total disbursements

Original
Framework

Enhanced
Framework

Sep 1997

Feb 2000

448.00
29.00
21.25
Sep 1998

854.00
55.32
41.14
Jun 2001

21.25
...
21.25
...
21.25

41.14
...
41.14
3.09
44.23

III. Implementation of MDRI Assistance
I Total Debt Relief (SDR Million)3/
Of Which: MDRI
HIPC
II. Debt Relief by Facility (SDR Million)

Total

62.39
...
62.39
3.09
65.48

160.93
154.82
6.11

1/

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the
decision point. Hence these two amounts can not be added.
2/

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding
to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim
period.
3/

The Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries
that are qualified for the assistance. The debt relief covers the full stock of debt owed to the Fund as of end2004 which remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief. The MDRI is financed by
bilateral contributions and the Fund's own resources, as well as the resources already disbursed to the member
under the HIPC Initiative (see Section VII above).

Eligible Debt
Delivery Date

GRA

PRGF

Total

January 2006

6.70

71.15

77.85

January 2006

83.08

N/A

83.08

VIII. Safeguards Assessment. Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Central
Bank of Bolivia (CBB) was subject to an assessment with respect to the April 2, 2003 Standby Arrangement (SBA). A safeguards assessment was completed on June 27, 2003, and
while no systemic risks with the CBB’s safeguards were identified, uncertainties were

4
expressed about the de facto lack of operational independence and program monetary data.
An update assessment was completed on September 27, 2004 in conjunction with an
augmentation of the SBA. This assessment confirmed that measures had been implemented
to address all previously identified vulnerabilities, except for those requiring a change in the
central bank law. Currently, CBB is not subject to the policy.
IX. Exchange Arrangement. The Bolivian currency is the Boliviano and the exchange rate
regime is a stabilized arrangement against the U.S. dollar.1 However, the authorities indicate
that the de jure regime is a crawling peg, and that the exchange rate will be adjusted from
time to time in light of the evaluation of Bolivia’s real effective exchange rate with respect to
key trading partners. The official selling rate has been unchanged at US$7.07 per U.S. dollar
since October 2008.
X. Article IV Consultation. The last Article IV consultation was completed by the
Executive Board on January 14, 2009 (IMF Country Report No. 09/27). Bolivia is on a
standard 12-month consultation cycle.
XI. Technical Assistance, 2005–09
Department
FAD
FAD
FAD
STA
FAD
STA
MCM
STA
FAD
STA
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
STA

Purpose
Public expenditure management: the budget process
Tax policy
Decentralization and public expenditure management
Monetary statistics
Public finance information system
ROSC Data Module
Inflation targeting
National Accounts
Tax policy
National Accounts
Treasury Operations, Cash and Debt Management
Expenditure Policy (Fiscal and distributional implications of
petroleum product pricing)
Public Financial Management (Intergovernmental fiscal
relations)
Tax Policy (Tax reform and taxation of natural resources)
National Accounts

Date
April 2005
August 2005
October 2005
March 2006
December 2006
January 2007
June 2007
September 2007
March 2008
August 2008
November 2008
March 2009
July/August 2009
July/August 2009
October 2009

XII. Resident Representative. Mr. Luis Breuer took over the post of IMF resident
representative in June 2009.

1

See Habermeier, et al., Revised System for the Classification of Exchange Rate Arrangements, WP/09/211.

5
APPENDIX 2. BOLIVIA: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK1
1.
The Interim Strategy Note (ISN) that defines the World Bank Group’s support
to Bolivia for FY10-11 was discussed and approved by the Board on June 2, 2009. The
ISN has a total envelope of US$137 million of IDA resources. The lending program amounts
to US$90 million in predefined operations while US$47 million has been left available for
flexible use, to respond to the unforeseen needs, support the Government’s efforts to stem the
impact of the global crisis, and to reduce extreme poverty. World Bank´s support to Bolivia
includes financing and analytical and advisory activities in four strategic areas requested by
the Government that consolidate the progress accomplished with the previous strategy:
(i) productive development and support to production; (ii) sustainable development;
(iii) human development; and (iv) governance and support to public sector.
2.
The World Bank´s portfolio in Bolivia comprises 11 investment projects for a
total amount of US$302.8 million of which US$190.6 remain undisbursed. The portfolio
has been built in recent years with most of the projects (8) approved under the previous ISN,
which covered FY07 and FY08, and have therefore just started implementation. In addition,
in April 2009, the Board approved a US$30 million Additional Financing for the ongoing
Rural Alliances Project. The portfolio is entirely financed with IDA resources and includes
the following projects:
Project
Decentralized Infrastructure for Rural Transformation
Road rehabilitation and Maintenance
Urban Infrastructure
Secondary Education Transformation
Land for Agricultural Development
Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management
Participatory Rural Investment II
Lake Titicaca Local Sustainable Development
Investing in Children and Youth
Expanding Access to Reduce Health Inequalities
Rural Alliances
TOTAL

Commitment
(US$ million)

Disbursed
(US$ million)

20.0
77.0
30.0
10.0
15.0
16.9
20.0
20.0
17.0
18.5
58.4
302.8

7.5
61.6
18.3
2.2
1.3
2.8
1.8
0.7
0.6
0.0
15.4
112.2

Closing Date
November 2009
December 2009
November 2010
December 2010
June 2012
June 2012
March 2013
June 2013
December 2013
January 2014
March 2014

3.
The ISN’s new lending program includes the following pipeline of investment
operations: Monitoring and Evaluation of MDGs (slipped from the previous ISN), Urban
Alliances (former Productivity and Job Creation, slipped from the previous ISN), Innovation
and Agricultural Services, Rural Roads, and Community Driven Development to Support the
Eradication of Poverty. Moreover, the Government is considering a request for additional
financing in FY10 for some projects currently under implementation: Urban Infrastructure
1

Prepared by World Bank staff.

6
for the Poor, Secondary Education Transformation in the Municipality of La Paz, and the
Social Protection Project.
4.
The Government is considering access to non-concessional funding in addition to
IDA resources. Taking into account its GNI per capita, Bolivia has been a blend country
since FY2002. However, the country has only had access to IDA resources. Considering its
anticipated financing needs in 2010, the Government is seeking access to IBRD funding in
addition to its IDA allocation.
5.
In addition to the investment portfolio, the World Bank program includes Trust
Funds and Global Programs. The Bank is currently managing three grants amounting to
US$5.5 million, which support institutional strengthening and project execution. These
include: Global Partnership on Output Based Aid (US$5.2 million), Strengthening of the
Deputies Chamber Finance Commission (US$0.2 million), and Strengthening Donor Aid
Coordination ($0.1 million). In addition a South-South Trust Fund (US$0.1 million) has been
approved to support the Government in the design of its program to eradicate extreme
poverty.
6.
In terms of analytical and advisory activities, the World Bank is carrying out a
comprehensive set of tasks in areas requested by the Government. Current Economic and
Sector Work (ESW) and Non-Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) include the following:











.

Public Expenditure and Financial Assessment — PEFA
Rising Food Prices in Bolivia (ESW)
Municipal Services and Finances (ESW)
Agricultural Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Economic and Social Impact of Climate Change (ESW)
Social Protection Phases III and IV (Non-lending Technical Assistance)
Education (NLTA)
Strengthening the Public Investment System (NLTA)
Multidimensional Poverty (NLTA)
Natural Gas (NLTA)
Private Sector Development Dialogue (NLTA)

7
APPENDIX 3. BOLIVIA: RELATIONS WITH THE INTER-AMERICAN
DEVELOPMENT BANK 1
1.
As of November 30, 2009, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) had
approved loans to Bolivia amounting to US$4.31 billion, with disbursements totaling
US$3.72 billion. Bolivia’s outstanding debt to the IDB was approximately US$562 millions
with undisbursed approved funds for US$587.8 millions. Net cash flows to the country are
expected to be positive to the country for the first time since 2005, a trend expected to
continue in the base scenario to 2015. At the end of 2007, the IDB unilaterally joined the
IMF-WB MDRI initiative, by writing off a total of US$741.1 million in principal payments and
US$307.3 millions of future interest payments, generating an estimated annual fiscal space of
more than US$18 millions on average.
2.
The IDB has implemented a new criterion of allocation of concessional lending.
Consistent with the application of the Debt Sustainability Framework and after the last round
of debt relief, new IDB lending to Bolivia will be following newly adopted operational
guidelines for concessional funds under the Fund of Special Operations performance-based
allocation system. Parallel lending operations, modality that features differential combination
between ordinary and concessional funding, will be enacted as the preferred lending
instrument up to 2015. Bolivia will be allocated 30 percent of concessional element under
IDB’s blended financial conditions. During the 2009-2010, attending an increasing demand
of international finance flows from the region due to eroded global conditions; the IDB
increased temporarily the availability of funds for its concessional window, with Bolivia
enjoying an annual allocation of US$191 millions for 2009 and US$200 millions for 2010.
3.
Under the 2008-2010 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia, the government and
the IDB have agreed on keeping sustainable poverty reduction as main objective of
their strategic engagement. In pursuit of this objective, the Bank has aligned its actions
with those contained by Bolivia’s National Development Plan in order to achieve a grater
degree of coordination among international cooperation entities acting in Bolivia, while
better targeting priority areas in the poverty reduction action plan. Four main strategic areas
are proposed under the new strategy: (i) productivity, competitiveness and productive
infrastructure, to promote economic growth consistent with poverty reduction targets; (ii)
water, sanitation and social development to target high-poverty municipalities; (iii) building
opportunities for the majority and development with identity to enhance the participation of
the bottom tiers of the income distribution; and (iv) institutional strengthening of the state at
both national and sub-national levels, to achieve higher efficiency of the public sector while
promoting the decentralization process.

1

Prepared by IDB staff.

8
4.
As of November 30, 2009 the portfolio of executing sovereign-guaranteed
operations in Bolivia consists of 33 loans, totaling US$1.03 billions, o which 43 percent
has already been disbursed. The current executing portfolio supports mostly water and
sanitation, health, infrastructure and productivity interventions. The undisbursed sovereign
portfolio is concentrated (53 percent) in the transportation sector. The non-sovereignguaranteed executing portfolio consists of 3 loans totaling US$114 millions, of which 86.8
percent has already been disbursed. The Bank’s 2009 operative program contains a portfolio
of sovereign guaranteed operations of 6 loans for a total amount of US$191 millions for the
year, concentrated in water, housing and agricultural productivity sectors. An additional of 9
loans for US$200 millions has been identified and are already in the Bank’s lending pipeline
for the 2010 cycle.

9
APPENDIX 4. BOLIVIA—STATISTICAL ISSUES APPENDIX
As of November 4, 2009
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance.
National Accounts: The National Institute of Statistics (INE) has begun a thorough revision
of the national accounts statistics, including the updating of the base year (currently dating
from 1990) and an intensified implementation of the System of National Accounts 1993
(SNA 1993).
Labor market. The quality of the household and employment surveys has deteriorated in the
last few years, due mainly to financial constraints. The quarterly employment survey was
discontinued in 2003, leading to a lack of quarterly information on unemployment,
employment and wages.
Prices statistics: Industrial producer price indices and external trade unit values are
compiled by INE, but are in need of revision as regards concepts and definitions consistent
with SNA 1993, as well as treatment of seasonal products, missing items, quality changes,
and introduction of new products.
Government finance statistics: Annual data on the operations of the consolidated central
government do not cover all operations of decentralized agencies and operations channeled
through special funds. The ongoing implementation of a comprehensive financial
management system, with funding from the IADB/WB, will help ensure proper monitoring
of public sector financial operations including subnational fiscal operations, debt and social
spending. It will also be important to improve on the reporting of the operations and debt of
public enterprises.
Balance of payments: Despite recent improvements in the coverage of private capital flows
and positions, as noted by the January 2007 Data ROSC mission, the coverage of certain
services and financial transactions in the balance of payments needs to be expanded.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Bolivia has participated in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since
November 2002. Data ROSC published on August 13, 2007.

BOLIVIA: INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(As of November 30, 2009)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Exchange Rates

Daily

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary
Authorities2

Daily

Frequency
of
Data1

Frequency
of
Reporting1

Frequency
of
publication1

Daily

D

D

D

Daily

D

D

D

Sep. 2009

Oct. 2009

M

M

M

Broad Money

Sep. 2009

Oct. 2009

M

M

M

O, LO, LO, O

O, O, O, O, O

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Sep. 2009

Oct. 2009

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Sep. 2009

Oct. 2009

M

M

M

Interest Rates3

Oct. 2009

Nov. 2009

W

W

M

Oct. 2009

Nov. 2009

M

M

M

LO, O, LO, O

O, LO, LNO, O, LO

Jul. 2009

Oct. 2009

M

M

M

LO, LO, LNO, LO

LO, O, O, O, LO

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Jun. 2009

Nov. 2009

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

Q2 2009

Sep. 2009

Q

Q

Q

O, LO, LO, LO

LO, O, LO, O, LO

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services8

Q2 2009

Sep. 2009

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

Q2 2009

Sep 2009

Q

Q

Q

LO, LO, LO, O

LNO, LO, LNO, O, LO

Oct. 2009

Nov. 2009

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index
4

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General
Government5
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing4– Central
Government6
Stock of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt7

Gross External Debt

10

Reserve/Base Money

Memo Items
Data Quality–
Data Quality–Accuracy
Methodological
and reliability11
10
soundness

International Investment Position9
Q2 2009
Sep. 2009
Q
Q
Q
1
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2
Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as well as the
notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means.
3 Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
4
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
5
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
6
Bolivia does not compile central government fiscal data.
7
Guaranteed non-financial public sector debt. Including currency and maturity composition.
8
Monthly frequency for goods only.
9
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
10
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC (published on August 13, 2007, and based on the findings of the mission that took place during January 24–February 7, 2007) for the dataset corresponding to
the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O); largely
observed (LO); largely not observed (LNO); not observed (NO); and not available (NA).
11
Same as footnote 10, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, assessment of source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of intermediate data and
statistical outputs, and revision studies.

Statement by the Staff Representative on Bolivia
January 15, 2010

1.
This statement provides additional information that has become available since the
issuance of the staff report. It does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
The 12-month inflation rate declined further to 0.26 percent in December, the lowest
rate in the last 20 years. The government has announced an increase in the minimum wage of
5 percent in 2010, to the equivalent of US$97 dollars a month, covering all public and private
sector employees.
3.
Net International Reserves reached US$ 8.6 billion by end-2009, equivalent to more
than 80 percent of broad money and over 20 months of imports of goods and services.
4.
The 2010 Budget Law was enacted on December 31, 2009. The spending envelope
therein is consistent with the fiscal projections presented in the staff report, and the law
includes useful provisions to improve cash-management, oversight of multiyear investment
projects, and information on budget execution. The law also establishes a new central bank
facility for financing to public enterprises, with a limit of US$1 billion (about 5.2 percent of
GDP).1 The new facility is earmarked for investment projects that would address food and
energy security concerns. As such projects have not yet been finalized, the budget does not
contain specific spending allocations for this purpose.

1

This facility is in addition to the one authorized for the same amount in the 2009 Budget law to finance
investments by the state-owned oil company ( YPFB), as reported in paragraph 12 of the Staff Report.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/09
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 21, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with Bolivia
On January 15, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the 2009 Article IV consultation with Bolivia.1
Background
In recent years, Bolivia benefited from a sharp improvement in terms of trade. Increased export
volumes of gas and mining and the concurrent boom in commodities prices led to a 230 percent
increase in export receipts between 2005 and 2008. Real GDP growth, which averaged
3.4 percent annually during 1996–2005, increased to an average of 5.2 percent in 2006–08,
peaking at 6.1 percent in 2008. The external and fiscal positions strengthened sharply during
the boom years.
Larger export receipts, coupled with higher taxation of the hydrocarbon sector and moderate
rates of increase in government spending, led to substantial external current account and fiscal
surpluses, which averaged 11.8 percent of GDP and 3.8 percent of GDP respectively in 2006–
08. These surpluses contributed to the build-up of a comfortable reserves buffer, which—added
to the debt relief obtained under MDRI—turned Bolivia into a net external creditor in 2008.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
Gross public sector debt declined to less than 40 percent of GDP by 2008 and net public sector
debt to only 20 percent of GDP, thanks to the accumulation of substantial deposits at the central
bank. However, despite the highly favorable trends, private investment remained subdued, while
the authorities have focused on expanding the social safety net and improving infrastructure.
Real output growth is projected to slow to 3¼ percent in 2009 as a result of lower export
volumes, mostly due to reduced gas demand from Brazil, and weakened domestic absorption
due to the negative terms of trade shock and falling remittances. Lower food prices and a
slowdown in domestic demand have contributed to a sharp decline in the 12-month inflation
rate, which declined to 0.3 percent by end-2009. Lower commodity exports and remittances
have resulted in a sharp narrowing of the external current account surplus to about 3½ percent
of GDP, compared with 12 percent of GDP in 2008.
The combined fiscal surplus is expected to narrow by 4 percentage points of GDP to an almost
balanced position in 2009, largely due to lower hydrocarbon and tax revenue (by 5 percentage
points of GDP). In parallel, the central bank reduced open market operations while letting the
short-term policy interest rates decline to almost zero, in the context of a decline in foreigncurrency inflows that had sharply slowed money creation. This is being transmitted gradually
into banks’ deposit and loan rates, which remain at record low levels (1.3 percent and
8.3 percent respectively). With regard to exchange rate policy, since October 2008 the central
bank has effectively pegged the Boliviano to the U.S. dollar, following a period of negative crawl
(i.e., gradual appreciation) that started in mid-2005.
The financial system has been barely affected by the global crisis owing to limited integration
with international capital markets. With negligible foreign credit lines in banks’ balance sheets
and lack of exposure to impaired foreign assets, banks have remained liquid, profitable, and
well capitalized. The strengthening of economic fundamentals and measures to induce
voluntary Bolivianization of financial assets have led to a significant decline in dollarization.
Nonetheless, the authorities have increased marginal reserve requirements on dollar deposits to
build up a higher foreign-currency liquidity cushion for banks, and also have tightened
provisioning requirements, including through higher provisioning for dollar-denominated loans.
Real GDP growth is expected to pick up to 4 percent in 2010, reflecting mainly a recovery of
hydrocarbon exports and public investment, and still favorable terms-of-trade, with inflation
projected to rise to about 4 percent. The external current account surplus is expected to narrow
moderately to 2½ percent of GDP, as a result of increased domestic absorption, while the
overall balance of payments is projected to remain positive, leading to a further accumulation of
international reserves.

3
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Bolivian authorities for their continued sound
macroeconomic management and effective policy response to mitigate the impact of the global
crisis. Growth has been among the highest in Latin America and inflation has declined sharply in
a context of financial stability. Fiscal policy has focused on protecting social and infrastructure
spending; the temporary stabilization of the Boliviano against the US dollar has provided a
nominal anchor, protecting the substantial de-dollarization already achieved; and lower interest
rates have supported credit demand. Looking forward, Directors concurred that the key
challenges are to maintain long-term fiscal sustainability through prudent management of the
country’s natural resource wealth and to further reduce the high poverty rate by boosting growth
through structural reforms and increased investment.
Directors generally supported a gradual tightening of monetary conditions as the economy
rebounds. Mopping up the abundant liquidity in the banking sector would prevent excessive
credit creation, foreign-exchange pressures, or a pick-up in inflation. Directors noted the staff’s
assessment of no significant evidence of exchange-rate misalignment. They welcomed the
authorities’ readiness to revise the rate of crawl of the exchange rate when called for by
fundamentals and market conditions. Over the medium term, most Directors encouraged the
authorities to set the stage for greater exchange rate flexibility, once low dollarization is
entrenched and domestic financial markets have gained greater depth. A few Directors however
saw no need to move in this direction, noting that the current regime has served the country
well. To strengthen the independence of monetary policy, Directors considered that central bank
financing of the government or public corporations should be avoided.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ sound fiscal policy, with public debt expected to continue to
decline gradually over the next few years. Given the budget’s reliance on revenue from natural
resources, they encouraged the authorities to strengthen the non-hydrocarbon balance to
generate additional savings over the medium- and long term. At the same time, it will be
important to strike a balance between ensuring intergenerational equity and addressing nearterm physical and human capital needs.
Directors welcomed the fiscal reforms under consideration. They looked forward to steps to
strengthen direct taxation, simplify the tax system, rebalance spending responsibilities and
revenue assignments across the national and subnational levels of government, and establish a
formal framework for the fiscal management of natural resources. Directors concurred that
gradually phasing out fuel subsidies would create room for strengthening the fiscal position
while further expanding development spending and social programs.
In the financial sector, Directors encouraged the authorities to focus on pending reforms while
maintaining the existing strong financial supervision. Priorities are the creation of a deposit
insurance scheme, the finalization of the preventative institutional framework for resolving
insolvent financial institutions, and the expansion of the perimeter of regulation and supervision

4
to cooperatives and other unregulated financial institutions. Directors welcomed the authorities’
interest in an FSAP update. A few Directors encouraged further strengthening of the legislation
on anti-money laundering and the operations of the Financial Intelligence Unit.
Directors stressed that—along with the promotion of public-private partnerships—improving the
investment climate is key to boosting Bolivia’s future growth prospects. They highlighted that the
upcoming reform of the legal and institutional framework should lead to a clear and stable
environment for private investment, including by introducing better procedures for enterprise
restructuring to develop the domestic credit market.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of
the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the
country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article
IV consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional
level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with
longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of
general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5
Bolivia: Selected Economic Indicators

2006

2007

2008

Est.
2009

Proj.
2010

4.8
13.7
4.3
4.9

4.6
7.4
8.7
11.7

6.1
10.4
14.0
11.8

3.3
-1.5
3.5
0.3

4.0
4.1
3.3
4.0

34.3

34.5

38.9

32.5

34.3

Expenditure
Overall balance
Total gross public debt

10.2
29.8
4.5
55.2

9.3
32.8
1.7
40.9

12.8
36.5
2.8
37.5

9.4
32.6
0.1
39.4

10.5
34.7
-0.3
37.4

External sector
Current account
Merchandise exports
Of which: Natural gas
Merchandise imports

11.3
33.6
14.5
24.4

12.0
33.5
14.8
26.0

12.1
38.8
19.0
30.0

3.5
27.4
11.2
24.9

2.6
29.0
12.9
27.2

3,193
62

5,319
75

7,722
85

8,567
82

9,257
78

10.2
6.6
33.0
16.8

5.8
6.7
36.1
12.5

...
...

...
...

(Annual percentage changes)
Income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
CPI inflation (period average)
CPI inflation (end-of-period)
(In percent of GDP)
Combined public sector
Revenues and grants
Of which:

Hydrocarbons related revenue

Gross international reserves
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of broad money

(Changes in percent of broad money at the beginning of the period)
Money and credit
NFA of the banking system
31.3
35.4
34.6
NDA of the banking system
-12.9
-3.7 -12.5
Of which: Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)
34.7
33.1
30.3
Broad money
18.5
31.7
22.2
Interest rates (percent, end-of-period)
Yield on treasury bills in local currency
5.4
7.3
8.6
Yield on treasury bills in U.S. dollars
4.9
4.6
4.0

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Statement by Pablo Pereira, Executive Director for Bolivia
and Victor Hugo De la Barra, Advisor to Executive Director
January 15, 2010
1.
Bolivia has largely strengthened macroeconomic stability in recent years and has
taken important strides in reforming its economy. Our robust macroeconomic policy
framework managed to isolate the country from the international effects of the crisis
providing confidence about economic stability and continuous growth. While the
international crisis affected Bolivia through the trade channel in 2009, a clear positive growth
has been achieved (3.3 percent) coupled with a substantial improvement in the standard of
living of the population, thanks to the ample social programs that are aimed to reduce
inequality in income distribution. Going forward, Bolivia’s macroeconomic outlook is
clearly favorable. To fully consolidate macro stability and achieve sustainable higher
growth, reform efforts will be enhanced with greater reliance on an expanded role for the
public sector as the engine of growth. The authorities have seized the opportunity of the
favorable international commodity prices in 2006-2008 to accelerate the pace of fiscal
consolidation, saving most of the additional revenue, maintaining control over current
spending and using the available fiscal space to increase the much needed capital expenditure
and expand the social safety net.
Overview and Economic Outlook
2.
Underpinned by the 2006 National Development Plan, growth was 6.1 percent in
2008 and slowed down to 3.3 percent in 2009 due to the international shock. This rate was
still among the highest in the region and real per capita GDP increased notably in the last
three years. For 2010 the growth rate is expected to be greater than 4 percent, boosted by a
significant level of public investment. The government’s overall fiscal position recorded a
small surplus in 2009 after reaching unprecedented surpluses in the last four years.
Additional hydrocarbon revenues and a prudent fiscal stance during these years have
contributed to a sustained stability, in spite of the international crisis. The gross debt-to-GDP
decreased to 38 percent thanks to prudent debt policy after the debt relief. The current
account still recorded a surplus of around 3.5 percent, while the ratio of international reserves
reached a record of more than 50 percent of GDP in 2009.
3.
The authorities remain cognizant that considerable challenges and reforms still lie
ahead. Increasing investment for development, combating poverty and inequality and
diversifying the economy though industrialization of domestic raw materials will reign in the
government agenda. The political situation of Bolivia was undoubtedly strengthened in early
December 2009 as President Evo Morales was reelected with more that 63 percent of the
vote, which shows a high level of acceptance and popularity. The recent presidential
elections reflect the fully democratic environment in which the current administration is
engaged in and the government expects to implement additional structural reforms across all
sectors within this framework.

2
Fiscal Policy
4.
In 2009, an accommodative fiscal stance effectively cushioned the economy from the
global financial crisis. The Bolivian authorities believe that discretionary fiscal measures
were needed to deal with these external shocks while preserving macroeconomic stability.
The strategy proved to be truly effective. As a result of our robust policy framework,
significant fiscal and external surpluses were achieved in the past three years, allowing the
authorities room for maneuver to increase the level of public spending and maintain and
expand social programs when needed the most. A key priority has been and will continue to
protect the poor from the damaging effects of the international financial crisis. The public
investment schedule could not reach the planned levels in 2009 due to difficulties in securing
contracts for hydrocarbon exploration and drilling and also due to capacity constraints.
Therefore, the government has planned public investment to reach approximately US$ 2
billion in 2010 (around 10 percent of GDP), with a significant part financed by fiscal savings.
Public investment will be allocated in infrastructure as well as in public enterprises to
enhance goods production. The state oil company’s plans to engage in an ambitious
investment program financed in part by a billion-dollar loan from the Central Bank of Bolivia
(CBB). It is expected that the hydrocarbons investment will spill over in the coming years,
and an increase in private investment is also envisaged in this sector.
5.
Expenses for health care and education will still be the main component of public
expenditure in 2010. Social expenditure will be maintained as well as the cash-transfers such
as the Bono Juancito Pinto to keep elementary school students on track, the universal
retirement pension (Renta Dignidad) for people over 60s, and the Bono Juana Azurduy,
another conditional cash transfer for pregnant women who attend regular pre-natal and
pediatric checkups. As a result of these benefits, the poverty level has been reduced. Yet,
the authorities are not comfortable with the current poverty levels and intend to reduce it
further by expanding the social safety net and improving access to basic infrastructure. To
this end, the authorities will continue to implement the Extreme Poverty Eradication Plan
which started in 2009. In 2010, the minimum wage will be increased by 5 percent following
the income redistribution policy. Additional resources to municipalities in poor regions will
be available for targeted projects.
6.
To boost fiscal revenue, the authorities are committed to continuously improve the
efficiency of the tax-collecting agencies dealing with customs and domestic taxes. The
implementation of the reform of taxation is under evaluation and the authorities expect to
gradually apply it over the medium term. They also intend to diminish dependency on oil
revenues as the economy diversifies as a result of additional public investment.
Nevertheless, the authorities are well aware of the level and effects of fuel subsidies and the
needed cuts in this regard. This issue was raised by the authorities during the Article IV
Consultation discussions, ahead of the staff’s recommendation. In fact, the authorities have
been working to find ways to implement targeted subsidies for hydrocarbons or differentiated
subsidies for electricity, as a means to release resources for social expenditure. However,

3
before proceeding to reform them, it is the view of the authorities that a well-targeted safety
net must be put in place first to avoid negatively affecting the poor and most vulnerable
segments of the population. In the case of hydrocarbons, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales
Bolivianos (YPFB)—the state oil company—will invest in the installation of domiciliary
natural gas connections, which will reduce the use of the more expensive liquefied petroleum
gas and consequently reduce the subsidy envelope. The authorities expect the fiscal stance to
be balanced by the end of 2010.
7.
The need to balance the accumulation of financial savings for intergenerational equity
and the more urgent demands for infrastructure, education, health and other social spending,
are also of concern for the authorities. In this regard, the 2006 National Development Plan
envisaged the creation of a fund financed out of public savings. Regarding a formal
framework for managing the natural resource wealth, the authorities have been way ahead of
the Fund staff’s advice on this issue. A formal framework was already conceived and drafted
in early 2006 and a draft law was prepared before the hydrocarbon nationalization. The
framework already included a sovereign fund which would serve as a stabilizer for
development purposes in case fiscal revenue falls short of the amount budgeted.
Unfortunately, this policy could not be concreted since there were extreme dilatory tactics
exercised by the opposition parties in the Senate. The authorities expect that the creation of
this sovereign fund will be expeditiously considered in 2010 since the government has gained
a majority in both chambers of the National Assembly. Nevertheless, in practice, the
considerable amount of international reserves accumulated since 2006 has served as a
stabilization fund by itself, which may be used as a financing cushion for public investment,
a key driver for growth and employment in Bolivia.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
8.
The (CBB) has been easing monetary policy since end-2008 and cut its benchmark
rate sharply in 2009, seeking to lower commercial lending rates and boosting banking credit
to the private sector. In the same vein, the open market operations were reversed last year to
allow a moderate expansionary stance in light of the need to boost domestic demand.
Moreover, we are pleased to report that Bolivia accrued a historically low level of inflation in
2009 (0.26 percent) vis-à-vis an economy that expanded by 3.3 percent. This certainly
complements the authorities’ effort to further reduce poverty and inequality. The monetary
expansionary policy will continue in 2010, however, adjustments will be applied as
warranted to control inflation developments. The expected developments in the economy
allow a forecasted inflation of less than 4 percent for 2010.
9.
The authorities are of the view that the CBB has to substantially contribute to
economic development while preserving monetary stability as long as development financing
is still a constraint for a country like Bolivia. For this reason, the authorities have authorized
the CBB to finance YPFB for its prioritized investments in 2010. Given the comfortable
level of international reserves—which are well above the level required according to the

4
Fund—YPFB will temporarily borrow $1 billion from the CBB to undertake projects aimed
to augment the hydrocarbon production capacity for domestic and international markets. In
the same vein, the 2010 Budget Law has included a special authorization for the CBB to
grant an additional loan amounting to another $1 billion for other strategic public enterprises
which will also carry out other important investments. The authorities would like to stress
that these are temporary measures that would allow to support strategically important
investment needs (joint ventures and own enterprises) while other sources of financing are
being designed. In particular, they are now considering tapping international financial
markets to support the Bolivian public enterprises.
10.
The CBB will continue to closely coordinate financial programming with the
Ministry of Finance; in fact a Memo of Understanding between these institutions is signed
every year in order to monitor the monetary and fiscal developments for stability purposes.
Above all, President Evo Morales is strongly committed to macroeconomic stability as well
as economic development to reduce poverty and strengthen the economy as whole.
11.
The crawling peg regime has served Bolivia well. Since the start of the international
crisis in the second half of 2008, the CBB—in light of the tremendous volatility of exchange
rates around the world—decided to be cautious about allowing sudden movements in the
value of the national currency vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and neighboring countries’ currencies
in order to avoid inflationary pressures, keep the gains from the de-dollarization process of
banking deposits, and signal stability in general. As a result, the nominal exchange rate has
remained relatively unchanged since October 2008. In 2009 the exchange rate policy was
supported by a very strong and still increasing level of international reserves, and a very low
inflation. Pressures for nominal depreciation were notably contained, benefiting stability and
creating more confidence with regards to the value of the national currency. By the fourth
quarter of 2009, the boliviano started to depreciate in real terms while the current account
kept its positive stance and international reserves reached record levels. At this time, the real
exchange rate is in line with its fundamentals, meaning that the authorities were right about
the exchange rate policy last year, avoiding volatility, containing the transmission of
volatility of international markets to the domestic market, while being attentive to the
country’s international competitiveness. The CBB will continue to use the crawling peg
regime and it stands ready for a more flexible exchange rate as warranted. The CBB
authorities are committed to maintain the exchange rate around its equilibrium level in real
terms.
12.
Bolivia’s current-account surplus for 2010 will be smaller but still positive (2.6
percent of GDP). On the one hand, demand and prices for natural-gas exports are expected
to remain subdued—relative to 2008 levels—and imports may increase as a consequence of
the public investment program. On the other hand, metal prices and other commodity prices
are already showing a positive recovery. All in all, the prospects for international trade are
encouraging as the global economy is rebounding. In the same vein, remittances to Bolivia

5
are projected to recover in 2010. As a result, international reserves are expected to increase
while public debt sustainability has improved.
13.
As a result of positive signs about the strength of the external sector in 2009,
international ratings for Bolivia have increased. Fitch—in September 2009—upgraded its
rating on Bolivia. In fact, Bolivia’s Foreign and Local Currency Issuer Default Ratings went
up from “B-” to “B”. Following the same pattern, Moody’s moved Bolivia’s Long-Term
Foreign Currency Debt Rating up to “B2” from “B3”.
Financial Developments
14.
Bolivia’s banking sector is healthy, liquid, profitable and well capitalized.
Interestingly, in 2009 the sector recorded clear signs of improvement: nonperforming loans
went down; provisions increased, and profitability also improved. Banking supervision was
enhanced through countercyclical measures, such as the additional prevision on foreigncurrency denominated loans. Banks are very liquid and deposit interest rates are at a very
low level. Credit has not grown as much as the deposits but the authorities expect that it will
rebound in 2010 in light of better prospects for the economy as a result of the fiscal impulse
in 2009 and the significant level of public investment in 2010. Credit risk regulations are
serving the system well so far, and the supervision authority is working on strengthening its
supervisory capabilities.
15.
Additionally, the banking sector is enjoying an enhanced competence with the
presence of one state-owned bank, which is operating following the rules of the market and
has notably improved the quality of its services. Micro credit is expected to perform an
increasing role in the credit market as more operators are seeking full license from the
Authority for the Supervision of the Financial System (ASFI), which is now also in charge of
supervising securities and insurance sector. Even though the banking system is healthy, the
authorities are considering reviewing the current financial safety net at the time of the
mandatory modifications of the financial system laws according to the New Constitution.
16.
To further encourage commercial credit, the authorities are preparing additional
legislation to rule on guarantees and collateral in order to foster the borrower profile and
remove credit constraints. Along the same lines, they are working on insurance schemes for
micro finances and raising additional funds for the stated-owned bank. The authorities have
expressed interest in an FSAP to Bolivia’s financial system, which may be useful for more
efficient policy making, taking into account that the last FSAP was conducted in 2003.
17.
Financial dollarization has significantly decreased since 2006. By the end of 2009,
the domestic-currency deposits amounted to 44.2 percent compared to 42.4 percent in 2008.
This evolution is a consequence of the recent developments in macroeconomic policy as a
whole, especially the trend of the exchange rate, the widening of the spread between the
buying and selling exchange rate, the financial transaction tax—which is now levied only on
foreign currency denominated operations—and the settling of inflation-indexed financial

6
instruments, the use of which has slowed down significantly. The authorities intend to
preserve the level of bolivianization on the banking system; therefore, they intend to
cautiously manage the exchange rate and monetary policies.
Development Policy and Structural Reforms
18.
In accordance with the New Constitution in place since January 2009, the new
administration of President Evo Morales (as of January 2010) will start the preparation and
implementation of several structural reforms aimed to support greater economic growth and
social inclusion. Among these reforms is the approval of the Law of Autonomies, which will
set up the new framework for enhanced decentralization and, consequently, new capabilities
and responsibilities will be assigned to the newly created levels of autonomy.
Intergovernmental relations will also be ruled accordingly. In the same vein, laws for
modifying the existing laws for the financial system, foreign investment, hydrocarbons, and
others, will also be drafted and sent to the National Assembly.
19.
The government has elaborated a new five-year plan which is coherent with the
National Development Plan 2006-2010. This new plan is based on four strategies: 1)
economic, aimed to increase productivity; 2) social-community oriented to improve the
social safety net; 3) the international relationship aimed to insert Bolivia in the international
community with enhanced negotiation capacity, and 4) political, and cultural ambits; and
social empowerment oriented to strengthen democracy through promoting social inclusion.
In this vein, in 2009, Bolivia managed to become an illiterate-free country, after executing a
project that deployed personnel throughout the country to teach illiterate youth and adults.
20.
Development of the hydrocarbons sector is still a key factor in Bolivia’s future.
Being aware of this, the authorities are doing their utmost to put in place a framework for the
exploitation of their vast hydrocarbons reserves, allowing room for private investment. For
that matter, the state oil company has planned an important amount of investments in the next
five years amounting to more than $11 billion in exploration and production seeking to reach
100 million of m3/day. The main partners will be Brazil and Argentina; with a new contract
being sought with the latter. The projects included in YPFB’s investment program will be
implemented on their own or in association with foreign or domestic private enterprises.
Mining is another key sector for the Bolivian economy. In addition to traditional minerals
whose production may expand from 2010 onwards, the government is looking for partners to
invest in the production and industrialization of lithium. Bolivia is considered to hold half of
the world’s lithium reserves from the Salar de Uyuni located in Potosi, in the high plateau
region. As for electricity, the authorities plan to execute large projects to reach a substantial
increase in generation capacity. As a result of the impulse of public investment, the Bolivian
authorities expect to induce a greater growth rate vis-à-vis 2009, throughout the whole
economy.

7
21.
The authorities are aware that private investment is important to growth and job
creation, so they emphasize that public investment in different economic sectors will pave the
way and add to further private investment. In some sectors such as hydrocarbons, investment
schedules were not accomplished, not because there is an adverse business climate, but due
to internal issues in YPFB and unfinished technical discussions with partners related to
contracts and agreements. In addition, in 2009 the effects of the financial crisis were still
active affecting investment across the world. Furthermore, last year was an electoral year in
Bolivia, since there were important national calls for a vote such as the National Referendum
to approve the New Constitution in January and the general elections for President, and
congressmen in December 2009, along with regional referendums to decide the autonomy in
four of the nine departments. It is important to note that in the last four years political
tension in Bolivia was recurrent caused by the opposition leaders while the Constitutional
Assembly was drafting the New Constitution. The government of President Evo Morales
even had to recall ratification of its mandate in August 2008 to reiterate its legitimacy to
pursue its reforms. Now all these problems have been resolved.
22.
In the government program for 2010-2015 and in the National Development Plan
there is a clear strategy for dealing with private entrepreneurs, based on the need to keep the
sovereign rights and pursue a sustainable development. The government is aware that the
business climate should be continuously improved through streamlined procedures for all
potential investors and, especially, to attain the enlargement of small and medium-sized
companies. These enterprises are labor intensive and their expansion would help reduce
unemployment, which is the major cause of poverty.
23.
To conclude, the overall good performance of Bolivia’s economy in recent years is
deeply rooted in its macroeconomic and development policies. Social inclusion has reigned
in the policy agenda and will remain a key pillar of the government’s economic strategy.
The administration of President Morales is fully committed on the same path of fiscal
discipline and pro-poor and pro-growth development policies. Brighter economic prospects
lie ahead.

