© 2011 International Monetary Fund
January 8, 2009
xxxJanuary 29, 2001

February 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/35
January 28, 2009 xxxJanuary 29, 2001
January 28, 2009

Hungary: Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Proposal for PostProgram Monitory
The following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
December 9, 2010, with the officials of Hungary on economic developments and policies.
Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on January 11, 2011. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



A staff statement.



A Public Information Notice (PIN).

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
HUNGARY
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Proposal for Post-Program
Monitoring
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with Hungary
Approved by Anne-Marie Gulde-Wolf and Lorenzo Giorgianni
January 11, 2011
Context: Hungary was hit hard by the global financial of crisis of 2008–09, reflecting large underlying
vulnerabilities and a high degree of integration into global financial markets. Following a severe
recession, an export-driven recovery is now underway, while domestic demand continues to lag. A new
government, which took office in June 2010, let the IMF/EU-supported program lapse and has begun a
fundamental redirection of policies towards increasing the state’s role in the economy, stimulating
growth and reversing structural fiscal adjustment.
Challenges: Even though some short-term crisis risks seem less pressing than before the crisis,
underlying stock vulnerabilities remain large, notably Hungary’s high level of public debt, the
dependence of the financial system on external funding, and large-scale currency mismatches. This
places a premium on policies that foster confidence by anchoring expectations. Raising the low
potential growth rate requires wide-ranging structural reforms.
Authorities’ strategy: The government’s focus is to quickly stimulate the economy through income
tax relief for households and corporations, enhanced family benefits, and targeted support to Small and
Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs). To reconcile these policies with the limited fiscal space provided
by the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact, the government is primarily resorting to temporary revenues
measures targeted at largely foreign-owned sectors and dissolving the funded second pension pillar.
The role of independent institutions in economic policy making and assessment (such as constitutional
court, central bank, and fiscal council) is being curtailed.
Staff’s views: Staff pointed out that the government’s strategy is risky as it needs the otherwise costly
tax cuts to trigger a strong response in economic activity, which may not materialize. By contrast, a
credible medium-term fiscal adjustment program to safeguard fiscal sustainability could set off a
virtuous cycle of lower risk spreads, reduced public and private financing costs, and, ultimately, higher
growth. Specifically, staff advocated to focus on expenditure rationalization and structural reforms. It
also urged to maintain a strong institutional framework, including for economic governance and
financial supervision.
Mission team: Messrs. Rosenberg (head), Gottlieb, Wiegand, Mdms. Carare (all EUR), Seal (MCM),
Messrs. Martin (FAD) and Saenz (SPR) met with Deputy Prime Minister Navracsics, Minister of the
National Economy Matolcsy, Central Bank Governor Simor, Chairman of the Financial Supervisory
Agency Szasz, senior officials of Ministries, the Central Bank, and other government agencies, banks,
and think tanks. Ms. Ivaschenko (Resident Representative) assisted the mission and maintains regular
contact to parliament, the business and diplomatic community, and civil society. Messrs. Kiekens and
Abel (OED) participated in some of the mission’s policy discussions.

2
Contents

Page

I. Context....................................................................................................................................4
II. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks ......................................................................................5
III. Policy Discussions ...............................................................................................................7
A. Fiscal Policy ..............................................................................................................7
B. Financial Sector Policies .........................................................................................11
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ....................................................................13
D. Economic Governance ............................................................................................15
IV. Capacity to Repay the Fund ...............................................................................................15
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................16
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Main Economic Indicators, 2006–11 ...........................................................................33
Central Bank Survey, 2006–11 ....................................................................................34
Monetary Survey, 2006–11 ..........................................................................................35
Balance of Payments, 2005–15 ....................................................................................36
External Financing Needs, 2009–15 ............................................................................37
Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2005–10 ............................................................38
Staff's Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2007–15..................................................39
Consolidated General Government, 2008–15 ..............................................................40
Central Government Financing Needs and Sources, 2009–11 ....................................41
Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector, 2006–10 ..............................42
Indicators of Fund Credit, 2008–15 .............................................................................43

Figures
1.
Vulnerability Indicators in Hungary Compared to Other Emerging
Markets, 2009 ..............................................................................................................27
2.
Recent Economic Developments, 2007–10 .................................................................28
3.
Financial Market Developments, 2008–10 ..................................................................29
4.
Bank Lending to Corporations and Households, 2007–10 ..........................................30
5.
Developments in Residential Real Estate, 1999–2010 ................................................31
6.
Monetary Policy Indicators, 2008–10 ..........................................................................32
Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

The IMF/EU Supported Program.................................................................................19
External Competitiveness Indicators of the Hungarian Economy ...............................20
The Authorities’ Policy Package and GDP Growth ....................................................22
Fiscal Implications of the Pension Reform ..................................................................24
The Support Scheme for Distressed Mortgage Borrowers ..........................................25
Hungary’s Experience with Inflation Targeting ..........................................................26

3

Appendix I
Figures
1.
External Debt Sustainability Framework: Bound Tests...............................................44
2.
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework: Bound Tests .......................................46
Tables
1.
External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15 .....................................................45
2.
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15 .............................................47

4
I. CONTEXT
1.
Hungary is emerging from a severe economic crisis. The economy was
immediately and profoundly
60
Portfolio Investment Held by Non-Residents
affected by the global financial
(in percent of GDP, 2009)
strains erupting in late 2008,
50
reflecting high pre-crisis
vulnerabilities1 and close integration 40
Government debt
into global financial and goods
Corporate equity
markets.2 Further, Hungary’s growth 30
Other
performance was already sub-par
before the crisis, given weak
20
structural foundations. The
combination of improved policies in 10
the context of the IMF/EU0
supported program (Box 1),
HUN POL LIT CZR SVK EST LAT BUL ROM
availability of large and upfront
official financing, and an easing of global financial conditions brought a stabilization from
mid-2009. However, while Hungary escaped a financial meltdown, a sharp recession was not
avoided: real GDP contracted by almost 7 percent in 2009 as exports fell sharply in the
context of a global retrenchment in trade and domestic demand declined amid financial
strains and limited policy space. Controlling for Hungary’s trade openness and pre-existing
vulnerabilities, however, the GDP decline was roughly in line with other countries in the
region (Section II).
2.
The government formed in mid-2010 has taken a decidedly new direction in
economic policies. The elections in April 2010 saw the opposition party Fidesz win a
two-thirds parliamentary majority, succeeding the technocratic government of Prime
Minister Gordon Bajnai.3 The new government led by Prime Minister Viktor Orbán let the
IMF/EU-supported program lapse and has stated that it is not seeking a successor
arrangement.

1

These vulnerabilities were well-identified prior to the crisis, including in the 2008 Article IV Consultation
(IMF Country Report No. 08/313). They included high public and external debt, a banking system dependent on
external funding and with large on-balance sheet currency mismatches, and corporations and households
indebted in foreign currencies that exposed the economy to swings in the exchange rate.
2

For a detailed discussion of these transmission channels see Wiegand, 2011, “Hungary’s Financial Crisis
of 2008–09: Causes, Evolution, Lesson”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper (IMF WP) forthcoming.
3

This government took office in April 2009, following the resignation of Socialist (MSZP)
Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsány. The Bajnai government relied on support of the MSZP and Free
Democrat factions in parliament, but Bajnai and most ministers had no party affiliation.

5
3.
The new government’s focus is to jump-start the economy. With virtually all state
institutions under its control and a sufficient parliamentary majority to change the
constitution, the authorities see an historic opportunity for forceful policy actions, supported
by an enhanced role of the state in the economy. Key pillars of this strategy are tax relief for
households, enhanced family benefits (to increase low fertility rates), and targeted support to
SMEs in sectors considered strategic (the so-called “New Széchenyi Plan”). In order to
reconcile these policies with the limited fiscal space under the EU’s Stability and Growth
Pact, the government is primarily resorting to temporary revenues measures targeted at
sectors that had made large profits in recent years, as well as the de facto re-nationalization
of the second pillar private pension system. Austerity measures that directly impact
households’ disposable incomes are considered politically unacceptable. The efficiency of
policy implementation is to be improved by reducing the role for institutions like the
Constitutional Court or the Fiscal Council (Section III).
4.
Two years after the crisis outbreak, Hungary’s underlying stock vulnerabilities
remain significant (Figure 1). On the one hand, liquidity buffers in the financial sector and
the external current account have improved, while the government’s cash position is
strengthening, especially as it assumes a significant amount of private pension assets. On the
other hand, high public and external debt (about 80 and 140 percent of GDP, respectively),
low reserve coverage, large-scale currency mismatches, and the economy’s growing reliance
on external funding (Section IV) have allowed vulnerabilities to persist, placing a premium
on sustainable macroeconomic policies that anchor investor expectations.
II. MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND RISKS
5.
The recovery that began at end-2009 is expected to gain strength (Figure 2).
Exports have increased for six consecutive quarters and employment has been rising since
February 2010. More recently, signs of a pick-up in private consumption have also emerged.
Going forward, tax cuts announced
6.8
for 2011 are estimated to increase
Real GDP Growth
(Annual percent change )
disposable income by about 5 percent,
while solid demand in trading partner
3.4
countries is projected to support export
growth. As a result, staff expects real
GDP growth to increase from around
0.0
1 percent in 2010 to about 2¾ percent
in 2011. The current account,
MfNE
IMF
temporarily in surplus in 2010, will
-3.4
swing into deficit starting in 2012, as
domestic demand and import growth
strengthen. Average inflation is
-6.8
expected to be around 4 percent
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
in 2011, reflecting higher commodity
Sources: IMF staff calculations; Ministry for National Economy; and
Hungarian Statistical Office.

6
prices and a pass-through from tax increases.
6.
Staff expects medium-term growth rates to remain below pre-crisis averages.
Exports will continue to be an engine for growth, helped by some boost to export capacity
from large FDI projects and the impact of the recent tax wedge reduction. More generally,
competitiveness appears adequate, with CGER estimates suggesting the real exchange rate
broadly in equilibrium—although qualitative indicators point to further scope for
improvement through structural reforms (Box 2). The boost to disposable income from
income tax cuts should persist through 2013, but the impact on consumption may be limited
if the uncertain policy environment and high unemployment trigger further increases in
precautionary savings. Overall, staff projects potential growth of 2–2½ percent over the
medium term as recent policy initiatives may boost labor supply but discourage investment.
Actual growth is projected to be roughly one percentage point higher than potential in
2012-15, gradually narrowing the large output gap. The authorities’ medium-term projections
are considerably more optimistic, with actual output growth reaching 5½ percent in 2015,
reflecting more favorable assumptions about labor participation (due to the income tax
reform) and especially investment rates (Box 3).
7.

The uncertainty around staff’s central scenario is considerable.



On the downside, the global recovery may slow (thus affecting exports) and risk
appetite may deteriorate. Given Hungary’s high external and public debt, a change in
investor sentiment would compound financing risks. Domestic demand would suffer
if the Swiss franc (CHF), whose value directly impacts households’ debt servicing
costs, strengthens further. High policy uncertainty could lead to a more cautious
behavior by households and investors than currently built into the baseline.



On the upside, accommodative macro policies in advanced economies could spur
global growth and induce stronger capital flows to emerging markets, which could
compress Hungary’s borrowing spreads. In the long term, the effects of the recent
policy package on employment and investment, if supplemented by structural reforms
and improvements in the business
800
CDS Spreads
climate, could turn out stronger than
(Basis points)
700
assumed in staff’s baseline. This, in
addition to the expected short-term
600
Hungary
improvement in headline fiscal
New EU Member States (average)
500
indicators, could reduce risk premia.

8.
A high degree of openness
implies spillover risks both from and to
Hungary. Statements by Fidesz officials in
June 2010, suggesting an imminent risk of
government insolvency, upset regional
markets and temporarily impacted the euro.

800
700
600
500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0
Jun-08

0
Oct-08 Feb-09 Jun-09

Oct-09 Feb-10 Jun-10

Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates.

Oct-10

7
Negative outward spillovers may also occur, should markets become concerned that policies
perceived as hostile to business (such as ad hoc taxes, reversals of pension reform) set
precedents elsewhere. Meanwhile, clear evidence of contagion from market pressures in
European peripherals is thus far limited. Hungary’s risk premia have recently increased
markedly, especially relative to regional peers (Figure 3), but this deterioration occurred
amid sharp changes in the domestic policy environment. Over the last months, the three main
rating agencies have downgraded Hungary to the lowest investment grade, with a negative
outlook.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
9.
Discussions centered on the viability of the authorities’ economic strategy, with
staff advocating a more cautious approach that safeguards institutional integrity, fiscal
sustainability, and financial stability. While welcoming the focus on growth, staff pointed
out that the government’s strategy is risky as it relies on fiscally costly tax cuts triggering a
strong response in economic activity which may not materialize. This risk is further
compounded by recent steps undermining economic governance. Such an approach was
particularly perilous given Hungary’s significant vulnerabilities, which make anchoring
long-term market expectations a key precondition for stability. Staff suggested phasing in
economic stimulus measures gradually, in line with progress in fiscal consolidation. To the
extent that such policies succeed in enhancing confidence in the sustainability of Hungary’s
policy framework, they would set in motion a virtuous cycle of lower risk spreads, reduced
financing costs for the public and private sectors, and ultimately higher growth. Lower risks
spreads would also reduce constraints on monetary policy.
A. Fiscal Policy
10.
Upon taking office, the government’s first task was to contain slippages in
the 2010 budget. In mid-2010 it became clear that the budget’s deficit target of 3.8 percent
of GDP was unattainable due to spending overruns around the elections and revenue
shortfalls. The authorities promptly adopted an emergency package that included a large
special levy on financial institutions, as well as some spending cuts, but also reductions in the
corporate income tax and the elimination of a number of small taxes. A second package,
introduced in October to compensate for additional spending (mainly on state-owned
enterprises and outlays related to floods), contained further levies on primarily
foreign-owned retail chains, telecommunication and energy companies, as well as a
14-months diversion of second pillar private pension contributions to the budget. Taken
together, the net deficit-reducing effect of these two rounds of measures amounted to
2 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, new revenue slippages emerged in December, putting into
question the attainability of the deficit target (defined in ESA95 terms).
11.
The 2011 budget is centered on the introduction of a flat-rate personal income
tax, reflecting the government’s desire to quickly spur growth. This reform, which will

8
be implemented over three years, envisages the unification and phased reduction of the
marginal tax rate to 16 percent, as well as the introduction of more generous child
allowances. The immediate revenue loss is estimated at 1¾ percent of GDP (and a further
1½ percent in 2012–13). The authorities explained that these tax cuts aim at improving
competitiveness and spurring labor supply and investment, which—together with greater tax
compliance—would eventually compensate for short-term revenue losses. Staff, while
supportive of reducing the tax wedge, cautioned against overestimating Laffer-curve effects
(Box 3) and argued for a more modest tax cut as envisaged in the 2009 tax reform.
12.
To compensate for these tax cuts, while still meeting the deficit target of
2.9 percent of GDP agreed with the EU, the budget relies primarily on temporary
measures. Key elements are a continuation of the temporary sectoral levies, the diversion of
second pillar pension contributions (about 1.2 and 1.3 percent of GDP, respectively), and
using assets transfers from the second pillar to fund spending (about 2 percent of GDP).4
Incentives are such that virtually all contributors are expected return to the PAYG system in
early 2011,5 implying total one-off revenues of about 11 percent of GDP in 2011. The use of
pension assets not needed to cover current expenditures will be ultimately determined by a
new supervisory body, but at least half is expected to be used to reduce gross debt. Structural
measures in the 2011 budget amount to about one percent of GDP, including some staff cuts
(0.5 percent of total government employment), reduced bonuses and in-kind benefits,
streamlined public works programs, and lower capital spending by local governments.
13.
While these measures are sufficient to meet the headline fiscal target, staff raised
serious concerns about the structural fiscal position. In staff’s view, revenues in the 2011
budget are optimistic in light of the 2010 revenue performance (especially on VAT and CIT),
which may signal a deterioration of the tax base. Excluding the pension asset transfer, the
deficit would be close to 5 percent of GDP, i.e. higher than in 2010. The heavy reliance on
temporary measures implies a substantial loosening of the underlying fiscal stance in 2010.
In 2011, the further structural weakening due to tax cuts is only partly offset by the
above-mentioned expenditure cuts and the now permanent redirection of pension
contributions (text table). Staff also argued that the envisaged measures will partly be passed
on to consumers, introduce distortions by discriminating between sectors, and—through
higher risk premia—send negative signals about foreign investment, which is critical for
Hungary.

4

Assets transfers are statistically treated as government revenue as long as second pillar contributors fully
switch back to the government’s pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system.

5

Those who remain in the private pension system no longer accrue rights under the PAYG system while still
subject to the employer social security contribution (24 percent of gross wage); those switching receive a tax
holiday on gains from transferred assets; and returning to the PAYG system is the default option while
remaining in the private system entails a cumbersome and time-bound application process.

9
Hungary: Main Fiscal Indicators
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010
Est.

2011
Proj.

General government balance

-3.7

-4.3

-4.0

5.7

General government balance (excl. transfer of pension assets)

-3.7

-4.4

-4.2

-5.1

Structural balance (in percent of potential GDP)

-4.0

-1.5

-3.0

-3.9

Primary structural balance (in percent of potential GDP)

0.2

2.8

0.8

-0.3

Change in the primary structural balance

1.1

2.6

-1.9

-1.1

Sources: Hungarian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

14.
To reverse the deterioration of the underlying fiscal stance, staff argued to focus
on further rationalization of current primary spending and other structural reforms. At
about 50 percent of GDP, public expenditure is much larger than in comparable countries in
the region. Staff, drawing on technical assistance advice, identified expenditure-reducing
measures of about 4 percent of GDP, which would eliminate the 2011 structural deficit and
55
set debt on a downward trajectory.
General Government Expenditures, 2009
These include rationalizing the public
(In percent of GDP)
wage bill and social benefits as well
50
as restructuring public transportation
companies.6 A property tax could be
an additional source of revenue.
45
Finally, staff urged progress in public
finance management to avoid
40
recurrence of spending slippages, as
well as continued implementation of
the tax administration’s compliance
35
strategy, and the merger of the
Hungary Czech Poland Latvia Lithuania Slovak Romania Bulgaria
Rep.
Rep.
customs and tax administrations.
Sources: IMF Staff Calculations ; respective Finance Ministries
Greater budget transparency could be

6

State subsidies to the two main loss-makers, the railway group MAV and the Budapest public transport
company BKV have fluctuated between ¾ and 1 percent of GDP over the last 5 years. This reflects inefficient
operation, steady losses, growing indebtedness, and government policy on ticket pricing. Transport State
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) have frequently received additional state financial support through capital injections,
asset sales, or debt assumptions. Malev airline is a recent addition to the state portfolio requiring financial
support.

10
achieved by publishing contingent liabilities; the latter was particularly important in view of
the greater prominence given to state guarantees in the New Széchenyi plan and the recently
expanded role of the state development bank MFB.
Options for fiscal consolidation
(Fiscal savings in percent of GDP)
Total potential consolidation from proposed measures
Better targeting of social benefits 1/
Active labor market policies' rationalization 2/
Reducion of the public sector wage bill 3/
Rationalization of state-owned transport enterprises to eliminate losses 4/

4.0
1.8
0.3
1.0
1.0

Source: IMF staff estimates, based on Hungarian authorities data.
1/ Decreasing the generosity of benefits, introducing means-testing to universal transfers
(such as child allowances), eliminating untargeted price subsidies, consolidating the design and
administration of social benefits at the central and local levels.
2/ Reduce generosity and coverage of public works programs should. Narrow the scope of active
labor market policies on groups most disadvantaged in the labor market.
3/ Reduce employment (rather than wages, which appear low relative to the private sector)
through atrition; consolidate local governments to achieve better economies of scale.
4/ Refers to the operational annual losses of MAV, BKV and MALEV.

15.
The authorities agreed with some measures proposed by staff, but were reluctant
to commit to concrete steps at this stage. They noted that a medium-term reform plan, to be
announced in February, may yield up to 2½ percent of GDP in savings. In addition to
administrative reforms (in local governments) and recent changes to public finance
management (introduction of budget inspectors), the authorities envisage inter alia steps to
restructure state-owned enterprises and a permanent (but smaller) bank levy. They agreed,
however, that implementing structural reforms will take time and that budgetary implications
are uncertain. In general, they expressed a preference for measures on the revenue side that
spare households.
16.
Staff also raised a number of concerns about the envisaged pension reform.
First, despite the initial debt reduction, the reform puts into question fiscal sustainability,
particularly if—as in the 2011 budget—assets moved to the PAYG system are used for
current spending. Second, it reduces transparency and increases fiscal risks (Box 4). Third,
by heavily biasing the terms in favor of switching to the PAYG system, it raises concerns
about business environment and property rights. Fourth, the implied erosion of liquidity in
domestic bond and equity markets could negatively impact the depth of the capital market,
one of Hungary’s strengths in the region. The authorities, while acknowledging some of
these drawbacks, were optimistic regarding the viability of the now expanded PAYG system,
pointing to measures such as the tax reforms aimed at increasing employment and fertility
rates. Further, the authorities argued that pensions were in safer hands with the state than
with private pension funds, which had performed poorly. Staff countered that low returns
could be better addressed by improved regulation.
17.
Views on the medium-term fiscal outlook differed significantly. The authorities
said that they were aiming at the medium-term objectives spelled out in Hungary’s last

11
Convergence Programme, which envisage a headline fiscal deficit of below 2 percent of GDP
in 2014 and public debt rapidly
Gross Public Debt
(In percent of GDP)
declining towards 60 percent. Staff
85
pointed out that with the phasing out
of temporary measures coinciding
80
with further tax cuts in 2012–13,7
fiscal sustainability was not ensured
75
under present policies, as deficit and
debt levels will bounce back sharply
70
after 2013, especially assuming
staff’s more cautious macroeconomic
framework. Staff’s public debt
65
Authorities
Staff
sustainability analysis shows that the
debt level is particularly sensitive to
60
growth and real exchange rate shocks
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
(Appendix).
Sources: IMF staff calculations and Hungarian authorities
18.
Staff urged the authorities to frontload durable expenditure measures and to
postpone personal and corporate tax cuts planned for 2012–13 until fiscal space
emerges. Such an approach was less risky than the authorities’ strategy, especially given the
large required cumulative adjustment (5–5½ percent of GDP in 2013–14 to achieve the
authorities own targets) and elections scheduled in 2014. In response, the authorities pointed
to a relatively benign fiscal outlook under their more optimistic GDP growth assumptions
and possible gains from the consolidation measures to be announced in February. If
necessary, sectoral levies could be kept in place until the recovery fully took hold.
B. Financial Sector Policies
19.
Hungary’s banking system has displayed resilience throughout the downturn.
The sector entered the financial crisis with a solid aggregate capital position (10.2 capital
adequacy ratio in Q3 2008) but relatively thin liquidity buffers (Table 10), which left some
banks exposed to funding pressures in late 2008. Subsequently, liquidity positions have
improved significantly. Furthermore, retained profits and capital injections by some
parent banks increased the aggregate capital cushion to more than 13 percent by
end- September 2010. Nonetheless, lending to the private sector contracted by almost
5 percent in 2009 and continued to stagnate in the first nine months of 2010, with mortgage
lending falling particularly sharply. Pre-tax profitability has recently dropped amid an
increase in non-performing loans to 9.3 percent at end-September 2010, with problem loans
7

Once fully phased in, the PIT reform will cost more than 3 percent of GDP a year from 2013 onward. In
addition, a reduction of the standard CIT rate from 19 to 10 percent in 2013 has already been put into law, at an
annual cost of 0.5 percent of GDP.

12
concentrated in unsecured consumer lending and commercial real estate. Moreover, capital
and profitability are unevenly distributed across banks, with a particularly strong position at
the main bank without a foreign parent.
Hungary: Key Financial Soundness Indicators
(end of period)
2007

2008

2009 End-Sept 2010

Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets

10.4

11.2

13.1

13.2

Liquid Assets to Total Assets
Return on Equity (After-Tax)

16.4
18.4

15.6
11.6

22.7
9.4

22.1
4.4

Source: Central Bank of Hungary

20.
While it was agreed that banks appear well placed to withstand challenges going
forward, staff noted that recent financial developments and policy initiatives increase
risks and may constrain credit supply (Figure 4).


Under the baseline scenario, non-performing loans are expected to peak around
12 percent in 2011, with most banks able to finance additional provisions from
income or capital cushions. A key risk is the recent weakness of the forint against the
Swiss Franc (CHF), as about 60 percent of mortgages are denominated in CHF. Stress
tests conducted by the Central Bank (MNB) suggest that the capital positions of most
banks could absorb even a sharp additional forint depreciation. However, in such a
scenario banks may restrain credit supply to preserve capital, and higher debt
servicing costs could further dampen households’ demand for credit. Moreover, with
the supply of mortgage lending stagnating, a further drop in housing prices—which
have already dropped by 10 percent—could reinforce pressure on household balance
sheets (Figure 5).



The financial sector levy introduced in July 2010 is large at 0.7 percent of GDP
annually8 (more than three times higher than the largest such tax elsewhere),
disproportionately affects foreign-owned banks, and, for less profitable banks,
amounts to a de-facto expropriation of capital. The size of the levy across institutions
has been fixed for 2010–11, but remains undefined for 2012 and beyond. The risk is
that uncertainty about the future design of the levy may lead banks to reduce their
balance sheet over time. Staff urged the authorities to pre-commit to sharply reducing
the levy after 2011 and aligning its design and size with emerging EU standards.

8

Of the total annual revenue of HUF 186 billion, about 70 percent will come from banks and the remainder will
be from insurance firms and other financial intermediaries. The CIT and a recently introduced special profit tax
can be credited against the levy.

13


A moratorium on mortgage foreclosures has been extended until end-April 2011.
Staff suggested its elimination, as it prevents banks from managing their mortgage
portfolios effectively and risks undermining credit discipline.



Banks seem generally prepared to meet the forthcoming higher Basel III capital and
liquidity standards, although detailed analyses have yet to be carried out.

21.
Staff generally welcomed the government’s plans—still in the concept phase—
to help certain homeowners unable to pay their mortgages, notably efforts to target
support to the most vulnerable while limiting moral hazard and risks to the budget (Box 5).
Other support measures for mortgage borrowers include provisions to prevent unilateral
changes to contracts and arbitrary fees and penalties, as well as the imposition of the
mid-exchange rate for the repayment of foreign exchange loans.
22.
The authorities and staff concurred that important yet still incomplete progress
has been made in financial supervision, but disagreed on the need for a cooperative
institutional framework. Staff welcomed a recently proposed legislation to grant the
Hungarian Supervisory Authority (HFSA) the authority to issue binding decrees on a range
of topics, although this power should be widened further. Meanwhile, despite staff’s urging
to the contrary, a new law removes the right of the Financial Stability Council (FSC)
consisting of MNB, HFSA and government to propose regulation or legislation on a “comply
or explain” basis, i.e., the government needs to indicate approval or explain its disagreement
within 15 days. Further, the FSC will in future only meet quarterly and its minutes will no
longer be published. Staff expressed concern that this change weakens an important element
in the financial supervisory architecture and is part of a broader pattern of a lack of
cooperation between the government and MNB that risks compromising the central bank’s
ability to safeguard financial stability.
23.
Staff noted that progress on some outstanding financial sector reforms would be
desirable. A legislative proposal submitted to parliament earlier this year to strengthen the
bank resolution regime has made little progress. Similarly, efforts to develop longer term
funding instruments, notably by strengthening the mortgage bond market, had to be
suspended.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
24.
Throughout the crisis, monetary policy has been constrained by the need to
avoid a disorderly exchange rate depreciation. Forint weakening feeds not only into
inflation through import prices, but can also destabilize the financial sector given
considerable household and corporate indebtedness in foreign exchange. In October 2008,
the MNB hiked interest rates by 300 basis points to avoid excessive currency depreciation in
the context of a sharp decrease in global risk appetite. Since then, the evolution of Hungary’s
risk premium has been a key determinant of monetary policy, allowing the MNB to ease in a
sustained way only from the second half of 2009, despite the emergence a large output gap

14
and generally contained inflationary pressures. The cutting cycle ended in May 2010 amid
resurgence in financial strains and a more uncertain inflation outlook. These factors
accelerated in the third quarter and in November and December, the MNB hiked policy rates
from 5¼ to 5¾ percent (Figure 6).
Monetary Policy Rates 1/ 2/
16
Actual policy rate
14
12
10

Rate matching long-term yield
differential with Germany
Rate matching long-term yield
differential with Switzerland
Taylor rule

8
6
4
2
0
Jun-08 Oct-08 Feb-09 Jun-09 Oct-09 Feb-10 Jun-10 Oct-10
Sources: MNB; and staff calculations.
1/ The matching rates are computed as: Implied Hungarian policy
rate = foreign policy rate + long-term spread where the long-term
spread is the difference in yield between Hungarian and
German/Swiss 5-year government bonds (in domestic currency).
2/ The Taylor rate is computed with a weight of 1/2 on both the
output gap and inflation, with inflation expectations proxied by actual
inflation.

25.
Looking forward, the MNB argued that inflation concerns may require a
proactive policy stance. It noted that tax increases, an unfreezing of administered energy
prices, and rising food prices would increase headline inflation above target in both 2010
and 2011, under unchanged policies. Moreover, inflation expectations may not be fully
anchored, given Hungary’s history of overshooting the central inflation target (Box 6). Thus,
if domestic demand recovers as expected, Hungary may witness higher wage inflation and
second-round effects from food price hikes. Staff acknowledged that inflation expectations
may not be fully anchored but suggested caution when tightening on inflation grounds alone,
in view of still low core inflation (1.9 percent in November) and the large output gap.
However, staff also noted that Hungary’s risk premium remains elevated and volatile, putting
constraints on the monetary stance. More generally, staff and MNB agreed that a clear shift
toward a sustainable medium term fiscal framework would help reduce risk premia and
facilitate a more accommodative monetary stance in the context of Hungary’s inflation
targeting framework, which remains adequate.

15
D. Economic Governance
26.
The authorities have recently initiated important institutional changes that
affect economic governance:


A constitutional change limits the powers of the Constitutional Court in assessing
fiscal and pension matters.



The Fiscal Council is being replaced by a consultative body consisting of the
chairman of the State Audit Office, the MNB governor, and a presidential appointee,
without support staff. Unlike the present Council, which immediately assessed the
macroeconomic and fiscal impact of all government initiatives, the new body’s role
will be limited to commenting on the draft budget once a year.



A draft change to the MNB law allows parliament to appoint all 4 external members
of the 7-member Monetary Policy Council—instead of the current rule where the
MNB governor and the Prime Minister nominate two members each. The government
has publicly criticized the present Council’s policy stance as too restrictive, raising
expectations about a change in monetary policy once the new members are appointed
in March 2011.

27.
Staff argued that such actions, besides removing important checks and
balances, undermine policy credibility and could translate into yet higher borrowing
spreads. The authorities said that the recent changes were aimed at improving the efficiency
of economic policy making. They also pointed out that the new institutional framework will
not be weaker than in many other EU countries and the functions of the Fiscal Council’s staff
could be performed more efficiently by existing institutions like the MNB or the State Audit
Office.
IV. CAPACITY TO REPAY THE FUND
28.
Hungary’s capacity to repay the Fund remains adequate, although modest
international reserves and a challenging sovereign amortization schedule pose risks.
External debt is broadly sustainable, albeit particularly sensitive to real depreciation shocks
(Appendix). Hungary’s exposure to the IMF is currently €8.7 billion (9 percent of GDP and
26 percent of gross international reserves) (Table 11). The bulk of repayment is scheduled
for 2012 and 2013. In addition, repayments to the EU in excess of 3.5 percent of GDP are
falling due in 2011 and 2014. Further to the current modest reserve coverage, the baseline
envisages slow deleveraging by foreign banks and moderate net corporate financing. As a
result, repayments will need to be at least partly financed through the net issuance of
long-term debt from 2013, just when staff sees a risk of public debt dynamics reversing. Thus
investor demand cannot be taken for granted—especially since, in the wake of sovereign
distress in peripheral Europe, attention will continue to be focused on highly indebted
countries. A possible mitigating factor is the planned transfer of private pension assets to the

16
budget, the foreign portion of which (about €3 billion) could be used to increase reserves and
repay the Fund.

14
12

€ billion

10

Public Debt Amortization Profile
(excludes debt with less than 12 month maturity)
IMF
EU
Other external debt
Domestic public debt

8
6
4
2
0
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Source: AKK and MNB

29.
In accordance with Fund policy, the Managing Director recommends the
initiation of Post-Program Monitoring (PPM). Outstanding Fund credit to Hungary
exceeds the 200 percent of quota threshold for PPM (it is expected to remain above this
threshold until August 2013 under the repurchase schedule), and there are no exceptional
circumstances that would indicate that PPM is not warranted. A Fund mission is expected to
visit Hungary in the spring to hold PPM discussions with the authorities. The first PPM
Board discussion is envisaged in mid-2011, concurrent with Board consideration of the
Ex-post Program Evaluation.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
30.
Hungary was hit hard by the global crisis, given large underlying vulnerabilities
and considerable integration in international markets. A tightening of monetary and
fiscal policies in the context of substantial IMF and EU assistance helped avoid a financial
meltdown. A deep recession could not be avoided but the economy has now begun to
rebound. The recovery is nonetheless fragile and vulnerabilities persist. In this environment,
risk premia remain elevated and volatile.
31.
Going forward, the challenge is to reduce uncertainty and improve the quality of
policies. Given the public and private sectors’ dependence on external financing, maintaining
investor confidence is critical and requires sound policies in the context of a coherent
medium-term macroeconomic framework. This could set off a virtuous cycle of lower risk
spreads, reduced public and private financing costs, and, ultimately, higher growth.

17
32.
The government that took office in mid-2010 is using its considerable political
mandate to fundamentally reorient fiscal and financial sector policies. The new
authorities have embarked on tax cuts and targeted support to small and medium-sized
enterprises, aimed at jumpstarting growth. As a result, much of the structural fiscal
adjustment achieved in the past two years is being unwound and replaced by temporary
revenue measures. Institutional changes reduce the capacity of the Fiscal Council,
Constitutional Court, and MNB to provide independent economic analysis and governance.
33.
The authorities’ fiscal strategy has positive aspects but for the most part
increases risks. Steps towards reducing the tax wedge on labor are welcome, as is the focus
on SMEs, and the desire to achieve these goals while meeting the headline fiscal deficit
targets agreed with the EU. However, the strategy’s success relies heavily on high GDP
growth which may not materialize. Moreover, temporary revenue measures increase
uncertainty and are distortive. Once they expire in 2013, debt ratios are likely to rise again
and—under unchanged policies—threaten fiscal sustainability. The dissolution of the second
pillar of the pension system allows the government to improve headline fiscal indicators
without undertaking structural fiscal adjustment, and—by replacing current obligations with
unrecorded future liabilities—reduces fiscal transparency. Overall, the deterioration in the
quality, extent, and permanence of fiscal adjustment amid large vulnerabilities increases risks
to the Hungarian economy.
34.
To achieve sustainable fiscal adjustment, a focus on durable expenditure
rationalization is needed. There is room to further rationalize current primary spending,
including poorly targeted social benefits and price subsidies. Restructuring of public
transportation companies and administrative reforms could also generate substantial savings
and efficiency gains. Revenues could be enhanced by improved tax administration and a
property tax. Such structural measures should be tackled quickly, thus freeing up fiscal space
for growth-enhancing tax reforms.
35.
The financial sector has remained resilient, but important risks remain and
require a strong supervisory framework. Sector-wide liquidity and capitalization are
adequate, but profitability has fallen amid rising non-performing loans. Looking forward, a
strong Swiss Franc may further impair banks’ mortgage portfolios while the outsized
financial sector levy will likely erode capital cushions. Such risks threaten to stall the
resumption of credit growth. Efforts to help distressed mortgage holders are welcome, as
long as moral hazard and fiscal cost are contained. Regarding financial supervision, the
government has appropriately given the HFSA the right to issue binding decrees. However,
the weakening of the Financial Stability Council erodes its capacity to safeguard financial
stability and contain systemic risks.
36.
The MNB’s cautious monetary policy stance remains appropriate, balancing
persistently high risk premia with ongoing slack in the economy. The forint’s
vulnerability to changes in investor appetite will likely remain a constraint on monetary

18
policy, given significant economy-wide currency mismatches. Tax hikes and global supply
shocks have renewed upward pressure on headline inflation, but the large output gap has
helped to keep underlying price inertia in check thus far. A clear shift toward a sustainable
fiscal framework would help reduce risk premia and facilitate a more accommodative
monetary stance, provided underlying inflation remains muted.
37.
Steps that undermine economic governance add to policy uncertainty. Besides
removing important checks and balances, this may undermine Hungary’s credibility with
investors and contribute to a further widening of risk premia compared to regional peers.
38.
It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Hungary will be
held on the 12-month cycle.

19
Box 1. The IMF/EU Supported Program
The IMF’s Executive Board approved a Stand-By Arrangement on November 6, 2008, with a
total amount of SDR 10½ billion (about €12½ billion at the time). It was complemented by EU
financial assistance of €6½ billion. Five program reviews were completed on schedule and
SDR 7½ billion (€8.7 billion) was disbursed (plus €5½ billion from the EU), before the new
government decided in mid-2010 not to seek completion of the remaining reviews before the
program’s expiration on October 5. Policies under the program were largely in line with the
recommendations made at the time of the 2008 Article IV consultation—notably in the fiscal area—
and included:
 Structural fiscal adjustment: the primary structural balance improved by about 4 percent of GDP
over 2008–09, notwithstanding some loosening of the headline deficit target in 2009 to avoid
exacerbating the economic contraction. Most adjustment reflected spending reforms. When added
to the 5 percent of GDP adjustment in 2007, Hungary’s structural fiscal improvement ranked
among the largest in emerging Europe in recent decades.
 Financial supervision: on-site bank inspections were intensified. Moreover, in 2009 a tri-partite
Financial Stability Council (FSC) was established with participation of the Hungarian Financial
Supervisory Agency (HFSA), the Central Bank (MNB) and the Ministry of Finance, with a view
to better integrate micro- and macro-prudential aspects of supervision. The FSC and separately
the MNB were granted the right to initiate legislative and regulatory action.
Moreover, steps were taken in late 2008 and early 2009 to stabilize market conditions. Not all
measures were covered by program conditionality, but they often implied the use of funds from the
IMF/EU package.








Government bond market: following a sharp sell-off by non-residents (€3.5 billion Q4 2008) and
several failed auctions, the government debt management agency (AKK) suspended issuance in
October 2008 for several months and re-purchased significant amounts of debt. While the AKK
drew down IMF/EU funds deposited at the MNB to finance these operations, the MNB sterilized
the impact on the money supply by issuing central bank bills. Thus, government bonds held by
non-residents were largely replaced by MNB bills held by domestic banks to assure the continued
financing of Hungary’s public sector.
External funding of domestic banks: in March 2009, the government extended foreign exchange
(FX) loans of €2½ billion to three banks without a foreign parent to compensate for the loss in
external wholesale funding. By contrast, foreign parent banks greatly stepped up funding of their
Hungarian subsidiaries during the crisis, and confirmed their commitment to maintain exposure
in the context of the European Bank Coordination Initiative.
Foreign exchange swap market: following severe disruptions in the foreign exchange swap
market that banks use to hedge their open foreign exchange positions, the central bank introduced
an overnight FX swap facility in October 2008, and 3- and 6-month foreign exchange swap
facilities in March 2009. Conditions normalized in the second quarter of 2009.
Foreign exchange spot market: in early 2009, the MNB intervened to prevent a disorderly forint
depreciation that would have harmed foreign exchange-indebted households and corporations.
However, the MNB relied primarily on interest rate policy to maintain orderly financial
conditions, including a hike by 300 bps at the crisis’ onset.

20
Box 2. External Competitiveness Indicators of the Hungarian Economy
Based on CGER methodologies, Hungary’s real exchange rate remains broadly in equilibrium
As growth collapsed during the global recession, so
Estimates of Overvaluation
did Hungary’s imports and payments for factor
Reference period
Oct-2010
services, thereby allowing for an adjustment in the
Methodology
current account of 8.6 percentage points of GDP to a
Macrobalance
-2
surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in 2010. For 2015,
External sustainability
-2
after a projected 6.9 percent appreciation in REER,
Equilibrium exchange rate
6
the current account balance is expected to decrease to Average
1
-2.9 percent of GDP, still above the current account
norm of -3.3 percent of GDP. As a result, real exchange rate undervaluation is estimated at 2 percent,
based on the macro-balance and external stability methodologies. The Equilibrium Exchange Rate
methodology, on the other hand, points to a 6 percent overvaluation, as its equilibrium rate estimates
are more in line with the much lower real exchange rate observed in earlier years. Hungary maintains
a de facto ‘floating’ exchange rate regime which is free of exchange restrictions and multiple
currency practices.
The authorities consider the current real exchange rate level appropriate. They noted that
Hungary’s high technological content in exports should allow it to remain competitive and that the
real exchange rate had evolved broadly in line with regional peers. Over the medium term, a gradual
and modest real appreciation was expected, consistent with income convergence.
Broader indicators suggest that structural reforms are key to maintaining competitiveness.
Hungary’s export share in world exports is quickly recovering after feeling the impact from the
global crisis.9 The Doing Business 2011 Report notes that Hungary improved its business
environment on the back of reforms implemented in 2008–09, including simplified taxes and tax
bases, amendments to the bankruptcy law, and improving conditions for acquiring construction
permits and registering property. Nevertheless, Hungary still lags behind its peers in terms of
the quality of institutions, infrastructure and macro environment (Global Competitiveness
Report 2010–11),10 highlighting the importance of additional structural reforms.

9

See World Bank (2010): “Doing Business 2011”.
See World Economic Forum (2010): “Global Competitiveness Report 2010–11”.

10

21

Box 2. External Competitiveness Indicators of the Hungarian Economy (continued)
Real Effective Exchange Rate

140
130
120
110
100
90

BGR
HUN
ROM

80
70
60
Jan-05

Jan-06

Source: IMF.

Jan-07

CZE
POL

Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

22
Box 3. The Authorities’ Policy Package and GDP Growth
Potential growth declined in Hungary since mid-2000, while it accelerated in the other CE3
countries due to markedly different underlying
8
Potential GDP Growth
trends in investment and employment growth. As
(Annual percent change)
an early reformer, Hungary benefited from strong
6
productivity and capital stock growth in the pre-2000
period. Then, despite a temporary uptick in FDI
4
inflows around EU accession in 2004, investment
growth declined. Moreover, social benefits and the
2
Poland
labor tax wedge increased from the early 2000s,
Czech Rep.
11
Hungary
contributing to lackluster employment growth. In
0
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
contrast, regional peers attracted more FDI inflows,
Sources: IMF staff calculations, based on data from National
benefitted from lower funding spreads, and increased
Statistical Offices; MNB; and OECD, etc.
work incentives.
In the medium-term, potential growth is expected to recover ground lost in the crisis, but again
remain below regional peers.


On capital, a modest increase in capital stock growth is expected post-crisis, with the recent FDI
inflows projected to increase manufacturing capacity. However, markets are now differentiating
against countries with high vulnerabilities and perceived weak policies more than pre-crisis.
Policy uncertainty and growth reforms achieved at the cost of fiscal adjustment are already
resulting in higher risk premia and an increased cost of capital. The investment climate will also
be affected by the selective taxation of specific sectors.



On employment, labor supply is expected to increase on the back of reforms implemented during
the IMF/EU-supported program and the introduction of a reduced-rate flat PIT, albeit modestly.
The latter is in line with empirical evidence from Russia and elsewhere (Ivannova and
others, 2005,12 and Keen and others, 2006).13 The flat PIT reform mainly benefits high income
earners who will also benefit from a generous increase in family allowances. Therefore, the
substitution effect of lower marginal rates may be offset by the income effect of lower average
taxes, leading to an ambiguous effect on labor supply for high income earners. Meanwhile, low
income earners will see no change in their marginal tax rate and an increase in their average tax
burden (mostly if they have no children).14 Experience in Slovakia (Moore, 2005)15 and Germany
suggests that labor supply effects can be increased by simultaneously implementing welldesigned benefit reform.

11

See Carare, Alina (2011):”Estimating Potential Growth in Hungary”, IMF WP (forthcoming).

12

See IMF WP 05/16.

13

See IMF WP 06/218.

14

Other announced measures, like restructuring the public works program, social security contribution
reductions for part-time employment of women, or simplified employment rules for occasional employment
may contribute to positive employment effects of the new flat tax system at the low end of income distribution
(Norregaard and Khan, IMF WP 07/274).

15

See IMF WP 05/133.

23
Box 3. The Authorities’ Policy Package and GDP Growth (continued)

Staff forecast actual growth of 3–3½ in the medium term is markedly below the authorities’
latest projections. Actual GDP projections are above potential growth (2–2½ percent), allowing a
large output gap (over 6 percent in 2010) to gradually close beyond 2015. By contrast, the authorities
are now projecting considerably higher actual growth over the medium term (5½ percent). They
assume actual employment growth of 3 percent versus staff’s 1 percent per year from 2012, based on
larger effects from the PIT reform. And they do not expect negative effects from their policy package
on investment, with growth rates of up to 12 percent in the medium-term, versus staff’s more
moderate rates of 4 percent. The authorities view the effects of their package as mostly cyclical,
however, as their estimates of medium-term potential growth (3–3½ percent) are only somewhat
higher than their previous forecast. Staff’s more cautious views on the potential and actual growth are
broadly shared by the MNB, the European Commission and private analysts.
Hungary - The effect of the 2011 tax reform on tax wedges across gross wage percentiles 1/

70%

Marginal tax wedge

70%

65%

2010

65%

60%

2013

60%

55%

55%

50%

50%

45%

45%

40%

40%

35%

35%

Average tax wedge (3 children)

Source: Ministry for National Economy
1/ Income tax on gross wages plus employee's and employer's social security contributions as a
percentage of the total labor cost per employee.

24

Box 4. Fiscal Implications of the Pension Reform
The changes in the pension system add to already existing uncertainties regarding the long-term
strength of public finances:


Additional expenditure pressures, given the transitory improvement in the fiscal balance and the
apparent creation of fiscal space. First, workers shifting from the private defined-contribution
(pillar 2) system to the government’s defined-benefits system (pillar 1) provide immediately a
stream of pension contributions, while corresponding pension benefit payments increase only as
these workers retire (left chart). Second, the transfer of pension assets from 1st to 2nd pillar is
recorded as revenue under ESA95 accounting rules, thus creating additional room for expenditures
while still meeting headline fiscal targets. Finally, to the extent that the government’s financial
debt is reduced, the interest bill declines and provides further fiscal space.



Heightened need to introduce reforms to make pillar 1 sustainable. Although Hungary’s definedbenefit pension system compares favorably within Europe, the reform compounds on a preexisting
pension sustainability problem. The government’s own estimates of pillar 1 sustainability,
including the impact of the reform and using optimistic assumptions about labor market
participation, indicates a negative net present value of the discounted contributions and pension
benefits to 2060 of about 10 percent of GDP. Sustainability could be further undermined if pension
parameters (retirement age, promised pension payout, indexation formula) were made more
generous.



Additional pension risk assumed by the government. All risks related to ensuring a commensurate
pension to retirees have now been shifted to the government, including from adverse trends in
labor markets, economic growth, or population dynamics (right chart).



Reduced transparency. The reform improves headline deficit and debt stock by exchanging an
explicit liability in government bonds for an implicit pension liability of initially about 11 percent
of GDP (the value of transferred assets, equivalent to pillar 2 pension claims).

Cash flow impact of the pension reform
14

Population projections
12.0

60.0

10.0

50.0

8.0

40.0

6.0

30.0

4.0

20.0

Net balance
12
10

New contributions' inflows 1/
New pensions' outflows

8
6
4
2
0

2.0

10.0

0.0

0.0
2010

2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
2056
2058
2060

-2

2015

2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045
Population of 65 years of age or above
Population between 15 and 64 years of age
Population of up to 14 years of age

Source: Hungarian authorities, United Nations and staff calculations.
1/ In 2011 and 2012 includes the transfer of assets in pillar 2. Assumes 100 percent switch from pillar 2 to pillar 1.

2050

25

Box 5. The Support Scheme for Distressed Mortgage Borrowers
Structure. The scheme is constructed around three “pillars”. Under pillar 1, banks are encouraged to
offer a range of restructuring options. If the loan becomes non-performing again, the bank can seek a
state guarantee under pillar 2 to cover the incremental costs of a further loan restructuring. Finally,
under pillar 3, the local government can acquire the property at foreclosure and may rent it back to the
distressed borrower. Pillars 2 and 3 will be overseen by a National Asset Management Agency
(NAMA), whose governance structure is yet to be established.
Targeting. Only low-income households who have serviced their mortgage for at least 12 consecutive
months will be eligible.
Costs. The government will collect a guarantee fee to fund pillar 2. There will still be upfront costs to
the government as some households are likely to qualify immediately for support under pillar 3.
Ultimately, up to one-third of currently distressed debtors may become eligible, although detailed
estimates have yet to be finalized. The government envisages that the process of going through pillars
1 and 2 will delay pillar 3-related costs. Tentative estimates by the Ministry for National
Economy suggest budget outlays of HUF 10–11 billion for 2011–12, increasing to HUF 120–
130 billion for 2013–14 (about 0.45 percent of GDP).

26
Box 6. Hungary’s Experience with Inflation Targeting
Hungary initially adopted inflation targeting (IT) in mid-2001 to accelerate progress in meeting
its primary objective of price stability. At inception, the MNB had many of the elements needed for
successful implementation of an IT framework (Heenan and others, 2006)16: statutory priority placed
on price stability, instrument independence, reasonable control over short term rates, well developed
financial markets, and a law prohibiting government financing.
Despite these strengths, the regime has faced challenges. First, until 2008, Hungary had a second
nominal anchor in the form of an exchange rate band which often conflicted with the inflation target.
Second, Hungary faced a series of fiscal shocks which frequently necessitated monetary tightening.
And third, particularly in the late 2000s, monetary policy has been complicated by the increase in
foreign exchange indebtedness of households and corporations, increasing the importance of the
exchange rate as transmission channel at the expense of domestic currency lending conditions.
Nonetheless, from the broad perspective of achieving lower average inflation, the IT regime has
been a success. Average inflation in the decade before adoption was 18 percent and 9.2 percent
in 2001, the year of adoption. By contrast, during 2002–08, a period characterized by steady if
moderate growth and large global shocks, headline inflation has averaged only 5.3 percent. Similar
progress can be seen in core prices.
The record is more mixed relative to the narrow parameters of meeting the announced inflation
targets. From 2001–06, the MNB met its annual end-year target only half the time. As of end-2007,
the MNB started targeting a “continuous medium term target.” Since then, inflation was within
½ percentage point of its target during only one five-month period in early 2009. In recent years, the
key drivers of these deviations from target have been exogenous supply shocks, currency sell-offs,
and ad hoc tax increases.

16

See IMF WP 06/278.

27
Figure 1. Vulnerability Indicators in Hungary Compared to Other Emerging Markets, 2009
800

600

Reserve coverage of
short-term debt and current account balance
Mean

Current account balance/GDP
10

95th perc
5

5th perc
400

15

Median

0
-5

200
-10
0

-15
Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging
Asia

Regional
peers

Hungary

Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging Regional
Asia
peers

Hungary

0

200
Total external debt/GDP

-2
150
-4
-6

100

-8
50
-10
0

Fiscal balance/GDP

-12
Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging
Asia

Regional
peers

Hungary

120

Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging Regional
Asia
peers

Hungary

20
Public short-term debt/GDP

Public debt/GDP
100
15
80
60

10

40
5
20
0

0
Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging
Asia

Source: IMF staf f estimates.

Regional
peers

Hungary

Emerging Emerging
Market
Europe

Latin
America

Emerging
Asia

Regional
peers

Hungary

28
Figure 2 Hungary: Recent Economic Developments, 2007-10
30

Industrial Production and Retail Sales Volume
(Year-on-year percent change)

20

Industrial production

4

Growth of Credit to Non-government Residents
(Year-on-year percent change)

30

Headline

23
10

30

2
23

0
15

15
0

-2

-10

-4

-20

-6

Retail sales (right scale)

-30
Jan-07
14

-8
Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

Private Sector Wage Growth and
Unemployment Rate

12

Unemployment Rate
(Percent, 3mma; right scale)

10

12
11

8

8

Excluding foreign exchange
valuation effects

0

0
-8

-8
-15
Jan-07

10

-15
Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

CPI Inflation
(Year-on-year percent change)

8

10

8

Headline

10
6

8

6

9

Core

4
6

4

8

4

7

2
Jan-07
30

Gross wages excl. bonuses
(Year-on-year percentage change)
Jan-08

Jan-09

6

Jan-10

Export and Import Growth
(Year-on-year percent change, 3mma, in Euros)

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

Exports

-10

2

2

0
Jan-07
600

0
Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

Trade Balance
(In millions of euros, 3-month moving avg.)

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

Imports

-20

-20

-30

-30

-200

-40
Jan-07

Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

-40 -400
Jan-07

Sources: Hungarian Statistical Office; and IMF staff estimates.

-200

-400
Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

29
Figure 3. Hungary: Financial Market Developments, 2008-10
330

Forint vesus Euro and Swiss Franc

230

320

220

310

210

300

Financial Assets Held by Non-Residents
(Cumulative change from
January 1, 2008, billions of forints)

300

Equities

190

-300

-300

280

300
0

0

200

290

600

600

180

270

170

260
Euro

240

Swiss franc (right scale)

1.2

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

-900

-900

Jan-10

Jul-10

Pricing at Hungarian Treasury Bill Auctions
(Maximum accepted yield less average yield, 3-month)

150
140 -1,200
Jan-08 Jul-08 Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10
14

1.0

12

0.8

10

0.6

8

0.4

6

0.2

4

10-Year Maturity Government Bond Yield
(In percent)

Poland
Hungary
Poland

0.0
Jan-08
700
600

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Czech
Republic

2
Jan-08

Jul-08

130

Credit Default Spreads
(In basis points)

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Stock Markets
(January 2, 2008=100)

110
Hungary

500
90

400
Hungary

300

`

70
Poland

200

Poland
Czech
Republic
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Czech
Republic

50

100
0
Jan-08

-600

160

250

230
Jan-08

Government
securities

-600

Jul-10

30
Jan-08

Jul-08

Jan-09

Sources: Hungarian national authorities; Bloomberg; and Hungarian Debt Management Agency.

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

-1200

30
Figure 4. Hungary: Bank Lending to Corporations and Households, 2007-10
(In billions of f orints, f lows, sa)
150
240

Households

Corporations
100

120

0

50

-120
0

Total

-240

HuF
FC

-360
Jan-07

Jan-08

Total

Jan-09

Source: Magyar Nemzeti Bank.

Jan-10

HuF

FC

-50
Feb-03 Aug-04 Feb-06 Aug-07 Feb-09 Aug-10

31
Figure 5. Hungary: Developments in Residential Real Estate, 1999-2010
8000

Construction of Residences
(in thousands of dwellings)

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

8000
Outstanding Amount
of Housing Related Lending
(Huf Billions, Not FX Adjusted)

7000

6000

5000

0
2001

60

2003

2005

2007

250

50

200

40

1000

0
0
Jan-00 Jan-02 Jan-04 Jan-06 Jan-08 Jan-10
30
Total Housing Related Lending
(Percent of GDP, Not FX adjusted)

25

Mortgage
Home Equity Lines

50

yoy (lhs)

5

Index (rhs)
0
2000

1Q-09

Home Equity
Mortgage

115
135

60
40
20
0
Jan-05 Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10

20

15

215

2008

NPLs of Household Loans
(Percent)

2008Q2

175
195

2006

2010

25

2010Q3

155

HUF/CHF

80

2004

10

5

235
0

Sources: Central Bank of Hungary; and IMF staff Calculations

Unsecured (HUF)

New Housing Loans in Swiss Francs
and the CHF/Forint Rate
(HUF Billions)

2002

Unsecured (FX)

1Q-07

Total Household Loans

1Q-05

Mortgages (HUF)

1Q-03

Mortgages (FX)

0
1Q-01

Home Equity (HUF)

-20
1Q-99

100

1000

10

-10

120

2000

100

0

140

2000

15

10

160

3000

150

20

180

3000

20

30

5000

FX

4000

2009

Housing Prices
(Growth and Level)

HUF

4000

0
1999

7000

6000

Home Equity (FX)

50

32
Figure 6. Hungary: Monetary Policy Indicators, 2008-10
14

1500

Policy Interest Rates
(In percent)

12

Forint
injecting

-500

Hungary

10

Central Bank Operations
(In billions of forints)

500

-1500
8
-2500
6

-4500
Czech Rep.

2
0
Jan-08
600

-3500

Poland

4

Euro area
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Foreign Exchange Swap Facilities
(In billions of forints)

500

Forint
absorbing

-5500
-6500
Sep-08

Mar-09

500

400
Total

Net central bank
forint position vis-avis markets

o/w Long-term

400

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

Forint Injecting Measures
(In billions of forints)
2-week &
overnight

300

6-month

300
200

Government
bonds 1/

200
100

100
0
Sep-08
2500

Mar-09

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

6000

Deposits at the Central Bank
(In billions of forints)

2000

0
Sep-08

Mar-09

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

Other Forint Absorbing Measures
(In billions of forints)

5000

Total
Reserve accounts
Overnight deposits

2-week
MNB bills

4000

1500
3000
1000
2000
500

0
Sep-08

1000

Mar-09

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

0
Sep-08

FX swaps

Mar-09

Sources: Hungarian national authorities; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Facility to purchase government bonds from primary dealers.

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

33

Table 1. Hungary: Main Economic Indicators, 2006–11
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP

3.3

0.8

0.8

-6.7

1.1

2.8

Total domestic demand 1/
Private consumption
Gross fixed investment

0.3
2.1
-3.2

-2.3
-1.7
1.7

0.7
0.6
2.9

-12.6
-6.8
-8.0

-2.4
-2.3
-2.5

2.3
2.1
0.7

Foreign balance 1/
Exports
Imports

3.0
18.7
14.9

3.0
16.2
13.3

0.2
5.7
5.8

5.9
-9.6
-14.6

3.5
13.8
11.9

0.6
8.9
9.4

6.5
3.9

7.4
7.9

3.5
6.1

5.6
4.2

4.2
4.9

3.9
4.1

CPI (end year)
CPI (average)
Unemployment rate (average, in percent)

7.5

7.4

7.8

10.1

11.1

11.2

24.0
16.4

23.5
16.6

23.7
16.4

19.2
18.7

18.3
19.5

18.8
19.0

General government (percent of GDP), ESA-95 basis 3/
Overall balance
Primary balance
Primary structural balance
Debt

-9.3
-5.4
-6.1
65.7

-5.0
-0.9
-0.9
66.1

-3.7
0.4
0.2
72.3

-4.3
0.2
2.8
78.4

-4.0
0.1
0.8
79.5

5.7
9.5
-0.3
69.8

Money and credit (end-of-period, percent change)
Broad money
Lending to the private sector, flow-based

13.6
20.6

11.0
18.5

8.8
12.2

3.4
-2.3

4.3
1.0

8.3
5.0

7.0
7.4

7.6
7.0

8.9
9.3

8.9
9.3

...
...

...
...

-1.4
-7.6
16.4
96.5

0.9
-6.9
16.4
103.2

0.4
-7.3
24.0
116.0

5.1
-0.5
30.7
146.2

6.5
1.2
33.5
144.2

5.7
0.1
38.0
139.5

Floating
Ft 207.3 = US$1; Ft. 274.4 = €1
99.6
100.9
91.8
...
106.4 110.2
103.8
...

…
…

Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP) 2/
Gross national saving (percent of GDP, from BOP)

Interest rates (percent)
T-bill (90-day, average)
Government bond yield (5-year, average)
Balance of payments
Goods and services trade balance (percent of GDP)
Current account (percent of GDP)
Reserves (in billions of euros)
Gross external debt (percent of GDP) 4/
Exchange rate
Exchange regime
Present rate (December 15, 2010)
Nominal effective rate (2005=100)
Real effective rate, CPI basis (2005=100)
Quota at the Fund

93.9
95.4

SDR 1038.4 million

Sources: Hungarian authorities; IMF, International Financial Statistics; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth. Calculated using 2000 prices. It includes change in inventories.
2/ Includes change in inventories.
3/ Consists of the central budget, social security funds, extrabudgetary funds, and local governments. It includes the IMF
staff assessment of the impact of all government announced measures (October 2010), including the full amount of the
bank levy in 2011.
4/ Excluding Special Purpose Entities. Including inter-company loans, and nonresident holdings of forint-denominated assets.

Table 2. Hungary: Central Bank Survey 2006-11
(Local Currency Billions)
2006

2007

2008

2009
Mar

Net foreign assets
Foreign Assets
Foreign Liabilities

Base money (M0)
Currency in Circulation
Banks' Reserves
Current Account Balances
Overnight Deposits

2011
Sep

Dec
Proj.

Proj.

3,838
4,362
524

3,941
4,359
418

5,988
6,584
596

7,261
8,484
1,223

7,891
9,191
1,300

8,764
10,290
1,526

8,014
9,542
1,528

8,209
9,738
1,528

9,506
11,035
1,528

-1,171
-141
233
373
280
93
-998
0
998
991
7
-4
-29

-1,150
-108
147
255
197
58
-1,029
0
1,029
474
555
1
-13

-3,383
-1,286
360
1,646
128
1,518
-1,907
177
2,084
834
1,250
0
-190

-4,786
-709
279
988
248
741
-3,589
0
3,589
489
3,100
0
-487

-5,461
-1,148
279
1,427
413
1,014
-3,971
4
3,975
213
3,762
0
-342

-6,136
-1,200
260
1,460
419
1,041
-4,011
16
4,027
671
3,356
0
-924

-5,419
-1,011
260
1,271
524
747
-3,755
36
3,791
215
3,575
0
-652

-5,539
-642
269
911
214
697
-4,297
19
4,315
215
4,100
0
-600

-6,584
-786
267
1,053
216
836
-5,199
23
5,222
215
5,007
0
-600

2,434
1,968
466
618
81

2,791
2,202
589
683
110

2,605
2,309
296
328
915

2,475
2,188
287
339
194

2,430
2,149
281
342
210

2,628
2,310
318
356
244

2,595
2,335
260
358
136

2,671
2,403
267
368
-101

2,922
2,629
292
403
-111

10.7
1.6
1.2
0.4
0.0

14.7
1.0
0.8
0.2
2.2
15.2
5.0

-6.7
6.2
0.5
5.7
4.7
7.2
2.0

-5.0
3.8
1.0
2.8
11.9
4.0
2.0

-7.2
5.4
1.6
3.9
13.9
11.2
2.0

5.0
5.5
1.6
3.9
12.4
8.8
2.0

4.5
4.8
2.0
2.8
13.2
12.2
2.0

7.9
3.4
0.8
2.6
15.2
…
…

9.4
3.7
0.8
2.9
17.5
…
…

Memorandum items :
Base Money (yoy percent change)
Government Deposits at Central Bank (percent of GDP)
HUF
FX
Central Bank Bills Outstanding (percent of GDP)
Portion of CB Bills Owned by Non-Residents (percent)
Reserve Requirement Ratio (percent of select liabilities)
Sources: Magyar Nemzeti Bank and IMF staff calculations.

5.0

34

Net domestic assets
Net claims on government
Assets
Liabilities (Govt Deposits at MNB)
HUF
FX
Net claims on banks
Assets
Liabilities
Two Week Deposit Facility
Securities Issued by MNB
Net claims on the economy
Other items, net

2010
June

35

Table 3. Hungary: Monetary Survey 2006-11
(Local Currency Billions)
2006

2007

2008

2009
Mar

2010
June

2011
Sep

Dec
Proj.

Proj.

Net foreign assets
Central Bank
Commercial Banks

-83
3,838
-3,920

-952
3,941
-4,892

-1,487
5,988
-7,475

564
7,261
-6,697

1,192
7,891
-6,699

1,454
8,764
-7,310

1,216
8,014
-6,798

1,875
8,209
-6,335

3,325
9,506
-6,182

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net claims on government
Central Bank
Commercial Banks
Credit to the economy
Central Bank
Comercial Banks
o/w Loans
HUF
FX
o/w Securities
Other items, net

12,868
16,255
3,026
-141
3,166
13,229
-4
13,233
12,857
6,478
6,379
46
-3,387

15,148
18,966
3,270
-108
3,378
15,696
1
15,694
15,057
6,449
8,608
87
-3,818

16,934
21,534
2,952
-1,286
4,238
18,583
0
18,583
17,994
6,210
11,784
97
-4,600

15,410
20,938
3,035
-709
3,745
17,903
0
17,903
17,326
6,201
11,125
118
-5,528

14,790
20,545
2,785
-1,148
3,933
17,760
0
17,760
17,174
6,303
10,872
123
-5,755

14,985
21,905
3,037
-1,200
4,237
18,868
0
18,868
18,278
6,184
12,094
132
-6,920

15,016
21,582
3,323
-1,011
4,334
18,259
0
18,259
17,681
6,378
11,304
101
-6,566

14,792
21,357
3,758
-642
4,400
17,599
0
17,599
17,499
6,662
10,837
100
-6,566

14,724
21,290
2,816
-786
3,601
18,474
0
18,474
18,374
7,730
10,644
100
-6,566

Broad money (M3)
M2
M1
Currency in circulation
Overnight Deposits
HUF
FX
Deposits with Maturities up to 2 years
HUF
FX
Repos
Money Market Fund Shares/Units
Debt Securities

12,785
11,913
5,833
1,838
3,995
3,225
770
6,080
4,617
1,462
73
764
35

14,196
12,937
6,348
2,068
4,280
3,498
783
6,589
5,248
1,341
82
978
200

15,447
14,252
6,162
2,137
4,025
3,277
746
8,090
6,510
1,580
22
858
316

15,974
14,364
6,122
2,039
4,082
3,205
877
8,243
6,473
1,769
35
1,115
460

15,982
14,063
5,942
1,993
3,949
3,021
928
8,121
6,263
1,858
29
1,247
643

16,439
14,371
6,346
2,150
4,196
3,266
930
8,025
6,281
1,744
33
1,345
690

16,232
14,211
6,326
2,173
4,152
3,168
984
7,886
6,189
1,697
33
1,372
616

16,667
14,592
6,495
2,232
4,263
3,253
1,010
8,097
6,355
1,742
34
1,409
632

18,049
15,802
7,034
2,417
4,617
3,523
1,094
8,768
6,882
1,887
37
1,525
684

Broad Money
NFA
NDA

13.6
-4.1
17.7

11.0
-6.8
17.8

(percentage change by contribution, y-o-y)
8.8
3.4
0.1
3.5
2.7
-3.8
13.3
11.4
12.3
3.6
12.6
-9.9
-11.3
-8.8
-0.9

4.3
8.2
-3.9

8.3
8.7
-0.4

Credit to Private Sector 1/ 2/
HUF
FX

20.6
9.7
37.1

18.5
-0.4
42.2

12.2
-3.1
25.6

Foreign Currency Loans to Total Loans 2/
Foreign Currency Deposits to Total Deposits 2/

49.6
22.2

57.2
19.5

65.5
19.2

Total Bank Credit to the Private Sector
o/w Households
o/w Corporates

54.2
20.0
27.4

59.5
23.4
28.8

67.3
28.9
29.9

Memorandum items :

(percentage change, y-o-y)

Sources: Magyar Nemzeti Bank and IMF staff calculation.
1/ Adjusted for changes in exchange rate
2/ Only credit to households and firms

-2.3
0.4
-4.0

-2.4
4.3
-5.7

-3.3
-0.2
-5.2

-2.8
1.4
-5.4

1.0
7.4
-2.6

5.0
16.0
-1.8

(percentage as share of total)
64.2
63.3
66.2
21.5
23.1
21.9

63.9
22.3

61.9
22.3

57.9
22.3

66.1
31.2
28.4

…
…
…

…
…
…

(percent of GDP)
66.5
65.3
30.1
30.0
29.4
28.7

68.9
32.6
29.3

Table 4. Hungary: Balance of Payments, 2005-15
(in millions of euros)

Current Account
Goods and service, net
Exports
Imports
Income, net
Current transfers, net
Capital Account
Net capital transfers
Financial Account
Direct investment, net
Direct Investment Abroad
In Hungary
Portfolio investment, net
Other investment

Overall Balance

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

-6,709
-1,408
60,022
-61,430
-5,019
-282

-6,831
-1,228
69,247
-70,476
-5,298
-305

-6,965
910
80,946
-80,035
-7,372
-503

-7,772
395
86,558
-86,163
-7,571
-596

-429
4,718
71,663
-66,945
-5,501
354

1,126
6,376
83,811
-77,435
-5,226
-23

126
5,799
91,877
-86,078
-5,423
-249

-658
5,459
101,088
-95,629
-5,855
-263

-1,234
5,300
111,184
-105,884
-6,257
-278

-2,274
4,702
120,035
-115,332
-6,682
-294

-3,712
3,734
129,417
-125,683
-7,135
-311

599
586

685
670

708
789

1,016
919

1,182
1,603

2,086
2,086

2,370
2,370

2,097
2,097

2,230
2,230

2,359
2,359

2,495
2,495

12,007
4,417
-1,756
6,172
3,388
4,203

8,841
2,327
-3,127
5,454
5,222
1,292

6,663
209
-2,643
2,852
-789
7,242

10,031
2,802
-2,095
4,897
-3,153
10,383

-3,592
-158
-1,709
1,550
-2,659
-775

699
-2
-1,314
1,312
1,052
-351

3,974
428
-1,324
1,752
3,462
84

1,562
553
-1,294
1,846
893
116

2,099
731
-1,671
2,403
1,294
74

3,690
409
-1,753
2,162
3,172
108

2,913
324
-1,838
2,162
2,448
141

-1,989

-1,728

-272

-2,522

-159

-533

0

0

0

0

0

3,908

968

134

753

-2,998

3,378

6,471

3,001

3,094

3,775

1,697

2,000
2,000
0

3,500
3,500
0

0
0
0

-2,000
-2,000
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

-2,000
-2,000
0

0
0
0

Prospective Financing
European Union
World Bank
Net International Reserves (increase -)
Gross Reserves
Reserve Liabilities
Bank Guarantee Fund
Prospective Fund credits

-3,908
-3,908
0
0
0

-968
-968
0
0
0

-134
-134
0
0
0

-2,753
-7,676
4,923
0
4,923

-502
-5,486
4,984
0
4,984

-3,378
-3,378
0
0
0

-4,471
-4,471
0
0
0

-3,001
738
-3,739
0
-3,739

-3,094
1,364
-4,458
0
-4,458

-1,775
-1,072
-702
0
-702

-1,697
-1,697
0
0
0

Current account (in percent of GDP)
Gross external debt (in percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves
In percent of short-term debt
at remaining maturity

-7.6
81.0
15,721

-7.6
96.5
16,397

-6.9
103.2
16,385

-7.3
116.0
24,040

-0.5
146.2
30,676

1.2
144.2
33,547

0.1
139.5
38,017

-0.6
131.2
37,280

-1.1
122.8
35,916

-1.9
117.9
36,988

-2.9
114.8
38,685

112.2

123.6

88.9

71.1

83.2

81.3

84.1

80.1

74.6

81.2

84.3

Sources: Hungarian authorities and staff projections.

36

Net errors and omissions

2005

37

Table 5. Hungary: External Financing Needs 2009-15
(in millions of euros)

Total financing requirements
Current account deficit - EU capital transfers
Amortizations
FDI (inter company)
General government
o/w: to IMF and EU
Banks
Other investment (mainly corporate)
Net errors and omissions
Total financing sources
FDI net inflows (excl. inter-company)
Disbursements (debt)
General government 1/
Banks
Other investment (mainly corporate)

2012
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2009
Est.

2010
Proj.

31,279

34,527

39,937

41,889

43,240

46,182

45,173

-753

-3,829

-2,496

-1,439

-996

-85

1,217

31,874
4,291
4,340
0
17,632
5,611

37,727
6,283
4,571
0
20,027
6,845

42,433
6,509
7,034
2,000
20,921
7,969

43,328
6,588
8,610
3,739
20,097
8,032

44,236
6,810
9,641
4,458
19,952
7,833

46,267
7,098
10,784
2,702
19,809
8,576

43,956
7,357
7,649
0
19,670
9,281

159

628

0

0

0

0

0

22,795

34,527

39,937

41,889

43,240

46,182

45,173

4,133
25,192
4,661
13,703
6,828

6,087
31,685
5,289
19,004
7,392

6,936
34,541
6,076
20,097
8,368

7,141
34,361
5,975
19,952
8,434

7,541
34,686
6,653
19,809
8,224

7,507
40,109
11,435
19,670
9,005

7,681
39,488
10,210
19,533
9,745

2011
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2015
Proj.

Other portfolio flows net

-1,044

430

2,930

-350

-351

-362

-299

Drawdown in gross reserves

-5,486

-3,676

-4,471

738

1,364

-1,072

-1,697

30,676
107

33,547
116
123
95
108
118

38,017
86
138
96
105
108

37,280
69
143
99
105
109

35,916
69
151
99
105
112

36,988
106
158
99
105
122

38,685
133
148
99
105
118

Memo items
Gross international reserves (level in Euro million)
Government rollover rates
o/w: Percent rollover on long-term non-EU/IMF debt
Banks' rollover rates
Corporate rollover rates (in percent)
Total long-term roll-over rate on non-EU/IMF debt
Sources: Hungarian authorities and staff projections.
1/ Excludes EU and IMF loans

78
122

38
Table 6. Hungary: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2005-10
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010 1/
Est.

14.7
15.4
6.7
6.8
34.4

13.7
20.6
7.0
7.4
39.3

11.0
18.5
7.6
7.0
42.4

8.7
12.2
8.8
9.2
45.6

3.5
-2.3
8.4
9.3
47.1

4.3
1.0
5.4
7.0
45.6

47.7
32.6
75.2
2.3

47.1
46.8
75.4
2.6

52.6
59.0
81.7
2.3

60.3
70.7
87.1
3.0

61.3
70.2
85.7
6.7

60.7
70.6
83.2
9.3

12.9
10.6
2.0
-7.6
0.7
13.5
5.0
15,721
2.7
112.2
..
81.0

15.4
14.7
-5.2
-7.6
0.8
9.8
2.6
16,397
2.5
123.6
111.9
96.5

16.9
13.6
11.3
-6.9
0.7
6.6
0.2
16,385
2.3
88.9
119.7
103.2

6.9
7.7
2.9
-7.3
1.0
9.4
2.6
24,040
4.3
71.1
148.6
116.0

-17.2
-22.3
-8.4
-0.5
1.3
-3.9
-0.2
30,676
4.8
83.2
177.3
146.2

17.0
15.7
2.7
1.2
2.1
0.7
0.0
33,547
4.7
81.3
…
144.2

11.1
29.2
11.6
1.2
21.5
18.1
14,012

14.7
33.2
13.0
1.1
27.6
19.9
13,270

16.4
33.7
12.8
0.6
30.7
21.8
18,428

22.8
36.0
8.0
1.1
40.1
16.1
33,816

30.5
42.4
8.7
5.1
42.8
20.2
36,871

30.5
42.4
8.7
5.1
42.8
20.2
41,269

20,785
74.0
26.2

24,844
58.0
20.8

26,236
84.0
54.8

12,242
504.0
419.1

21,227
186.0
237.9

21,460
411.0
383.9

Financial Indicators
M3, end-of-period, percent change
Lending to the private sector, flow based, end-of-period, percentage change 2/
T-bill, 90-day, average, in percent
Government bond yield, 5-year, average, in percent
Share of foreign currency liabilities in total liabilities
Share of foreign currency loans by sector
Corporates
Households
Other loans
Non-performing loans to gross loans 3/
External Indicators
Exports of goods and services, annual percentage change
Imports of goods and services, annual percentage change
Real effective exchange rate, percentage change, + = appreciation
Current account balance, in percent of GDP
Capital account, in percent of GDP
Financial account, in percent of GDP
Net foreign direct investment, in percent of GDP
Gross official reserves, in millions of euros
In months of imports of goods and services
In percent of short-term debt at remaining maturity
Total external debt, including SPEs, in percent of GDP 4/
Total external debt, excluding SPEs, in percent of GDP
Of which:
Direct investment intercompany loans
General government
Of which: non-residents holdings of local currency government bonds
Central bank
Banks
Non-financial institutions
Short-term debt at remaining maturity, in millions of euros 5/
Financial Market Indicators
Stock market index, local currency, end-of-period
EMBI Global bonds spread, end-of-period
CDS spread, 5-year, end-of-period
Sources: Hungarian authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Data for Financial Indicators are as of end-Sep. (M3, Lending), end-Nov. (yields), or end-Sep. (share of foreign currency loans and NPLs), and data
for Financial Market Indicators are as of Dec. 28th 2010. Projections for External Indicators are for end-2010.
2/ Loans to households and non-financial corporations only, exchange rate adjusted
3/ Non-performing loans are defined as corporate, household, interbank, foreign and other loans that are past due for more than 90 days.
4/ Special Purpose Entities are defined as resident corporations of non-resident owners, which perform a passive, financial intermediary function
between their non-resident partners. SPEs have a marginal impact on the domestic economy, and their transactions have negligible net impact
on the balance of payments (an enterprise that has a non-negligible net impact on the balance of payments is removed from the list of SPEs).
Foreign assets and liabilities of SPEs are largely matched, and loans are considered as FDI in accordance with international statistical standards.
Data for SPEs are not available prior to 2006.
5/ Includes an estimate of intercompany loans falling due in the short-term.

Table 7. Hungary: Staff's Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2007-15

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013
Proj.

0.8
25,321
7.9
7.4

0.8
26,754
6.1
3.5

Domestic demand
Total consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Exports of GNFS
Imports of GNFS

-2.3
-2.0
1.7
16.2
13.3

0.7
0.5
2.9
5.7
5.8

-13.0
-5.7
-8.0
-9.6
-14.6

-2.7
-1.7
-2.5
13.8
11.9

2.6
2.0
0.7
8.9
9.4

4.4
3.2
2.7
9.2
9.2

Lending to the private sector, flow-based (current prices, e.o.p.)

18.5

12.2

-2.3

1.0

5.0

Unemployment rate (percent of labor force, year average basis)

7.4

7.8

10.1

11.1

11.2

Average Average
2012-15 2002-07

2014

2015

3.0
33,716
3.0
3.0

3.0
35,665
3.0
3.0

3.0

3.4

2.9
2.3
3.3
8.7
9.1

3.2
2.5
3.7
8.0
8.5

3.3
2.5
3.7
8.0
8.5

3.4
2.6
3.3
8.4
8.8

2.6
3.8
7.5
11.9
10.9

...

...

...

...

10.6

10.0

9.4

8.8

2.2

2.7

(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Real GDP growth
Nominal GDP, forint billions
Inflation (CPI; year average basis)
Inflation (CPI; end-year basis)

-6.7
26,054
4.2
5.6

1.1
26,986
4.9
4.2

2.8
28,547
4.1
3.9

3.0
30,102
3.5
3.2

3.0
31,868
3.0
3.0

(Annual percentage change, constant prices)

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
-6.9
16.6
23.5

-7.3
16.4
23.7

-0.5
18.7
19.2

1.2
19.5
18.3

0.1
19.0
18.8

-0.6
18.4
19.0

-1.1
19.2
20.3

-1.9
19.9
21.8

-2.9
20.2
23.2

0.7
6.6

1.0
9.4

1.3
-3.9

2.1
0.7

2.3
3.9

2.0
1.5

2.0
1.9

2.0
3.1

2.0
2.3

-102.8
103.2

-98.8
116.0

-117.2
146.2

-120.1
144.2

-111.7
139.5

-102.4
131.2

-94.2
122.8

-91.5
117.9

-92.8
114.8

General government (ESA-95)
Revenue, total
Expenditure, primary
Primary balance 3/
General government balance (including the costs of pension reform)
Interest expenditure
General government debt

45.1
46.0
-0.9
-5.0
4.1
66.1

45.1
44.7
0.4
-3.7
4.1
72.3

46.0
45.9
0.2
-4.3
4.5
78.4

44.3
44.5
0.1
-4.0
4.0
79.5

52.9
43.3
9.5
5.7
3.8
69.8

41.3
42.9
-1.6
-5.2
3.7
71.5

39.5
42.5
-3.0
-7.2
4.2
74.7

39.6
42.2
-2.6
-7.1
4.5
77.8

39.8
42.0
-2.3
-7.1
4.8
80.6

Memorandum items
Output gap
Potential GDP growth
Structural general government balance
Structural primary balance (in percent of potential GDP)
Gross official reserves (percent of short-term debt at remaining maturity)

2.1
1.8
-5.0
-0.9
88.9

1.2
1.8
-4.0
0.2
71.1

-6.2
0.6
-1.5
2.8
83.2

-5.7
0.6
-3.0
0.8
81.3

-4.4
1.4
-3.9
-0.3
84.1

-3.4
1.9
-4.5
-0.9
80.1

-2.5
2.1
-6.0
-2.0
74.6

-1.9
2.3
-6.3
-1.8
81.2

-1.4
2.5
-6.4
-1.7
84.3

Capital account, net
Financial account, net
Net international investment position
Gross external debt 2/

Sources: Hungarian authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Includes change in inventories.
2/ Excluding Special Purpose Entities. Including inter-company loans, and nonresident holdings of forint-denominated assets.
3/ Includes interest revenue.

39

External current account balance
Gross national saving
Gross national investment 1/

40
Table 8. Hungary. Consolidated General Government, 2008-15 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Staff Proj.
Total revenues
Current revenues and current transfers (incl. grants)
Tax revenues
Taxes on income, profits and capital gains
Personal income tax
Corporate income tax
Levy on financial institutions
Levy on energy, telecommunication, and retail companies
Other (incl. wealth, capital, and property taxes)
Taxes on payroll and workforce and Social Security contributions
Taxes on goods and services
VAT
Other (incl. excises and duties)
Current non-tax revenues
Of which : interest
Current transfers (incl. grants)
Capital revenues and capital transfers (incl. grants)

45.1
44.1
39.7
10.3
7.1
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.4
13.7
15.7
7.8
7.9
3.8
0.3
0.6
0.9

45.1
44.5
39.8
10.5
7.6
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.3
13.8
15.5
7.6
7.9
4.0
0.5
0.7
0.6

46.0
44.6
39.3
9.8
7.3
2.2
0.0
0.0
0.3
13.1
16.3
8.3
8.1
4.3
0.0
1.1
1.4

44.3
42.7
37.9
9.3
6.6
1.3
0.6
0.4
0.4
12.1
16.4
8.6
7.9
4.2
0.3
0.6
1.6

42.0
40.2
35.8
7.3
4.6
1.2
0.6
0.6
0.4
12.5
16.0
8.3
7.7
3.6
0.2
0.8
1.8

41.3
39.5
35.1
6.3
3.9
1.2
0.3
0.6
0.4
12.5
16.2
8.5
7.7
3.6
0.2
0.8
1.8

39.5
37.7
33.3
4.4
3.2
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.4
12.6
16.2
8.5
7.7
3.6
0.2
0.8
1.8

39.6
37.8
33.4
4.4
3.3
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.4
12.8
16.2
8.5
7.7
3.6
0.2
0.8
1.8

39.8
38.0
33.6
4.4
3.3
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.4
12.9
16.2
8.5
7.7
3.6
0.2
0.8
1.8

Total expenditures 3/
Current expenditures and current transfers
Compensation of employees 2/
Goods and services
Interest payments
Subsidies
Current transfers to households
Social security
Of which unemployment benefits
Other
Other current transfers
Capital expenditures
Capital transfers
Other net expenditure

50.0
44.5
11.5
6.7
4.1
1.4
18.2
13.5
0.4
4.6
2.6
3.6
1.9
0.0

48.8
44.7
11.5
7.0
4.1
1.1
18.5
14.2
0.4
4.3
2.5
2.6
1.5
0.0

50.4
46.2
11.3
7.7
4.5
1.0
19.2
14.7
0.6
4.5
2.5
3.0
1.2
0.0

48.5
43.7
10.9
7.2
4.0
0.9
18.2
14.4
0.5
3.8
2.4
3.5
1.3
0.0

47.2
42.5
9.9
7.5
3.8
0.8
17.8
14.3
0.5
3.5
2.7
3.2
1.5
0.0

46.5
41.9
9.8
7.4
3.7
0.8
17.6
14.1
0.5
3.5
2.6
3.2
1.4
0.0

46.7
42.1
9.7
7.3
4.2
0.8
17.5
14.0
0.5
3.5
2.6
3.2
1.4
0.0

46.8
42.2
9.6
7.3
4.5
0.8
17.3
13.9
0.5
3.4
2.6
3.1
1.4
0.0

46.8
42.3
9.6
7.3
4.8
0.8
17.3
13.8
0.5
3.4
2.6
3.1
1.4
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-7.5

-3.7

-4.4

-4.2

-5.1

-5.2

-7.2

-7.1

-7.1

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

10.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-5.0
-0.9

-3.7
0.4

-4.3
0.2

-4.0
0.1

5.7
9.5

-5.2
-1.6

-7.2
-3.0

-7.1
-2.6

-7.1
-2.3

..
..

-3.8
-0.1

-3.9
0.4

-3.8
0.2

-2.8
-8.5

-2.4
2.8

-2.3
4.9

-1.9
5.2

..
..

46.0
2.1
-6.0
5.0
-1.0
-5.0
5.1
-0.9
5.2
66.1
25321.5
0.8

44.7
1.2
-4.3
1.7
-0.3
-4.0
1.1
0.2
1.1
72.3
26,754
0.8

45.9
-6.2
-1.3
3.0
0.2
-1.5
2.5
2.8
2.6
78.4
26,054
-6.7

44.5
-5.7
-1.4
-0.1
1.5
-3.0
-1.5
0.8
-1.9
79.5
26,986
1.1

43.3
-4.4
7.3
8.7
11.2
-3.9
-1.0
-0.3
-1.1
69.8
28,547
2.8

42.9
-3.4
-3.6
-10.9
0.8
-4.5
-0.5
-0.9
-0.7
71.5
30,102
3.0

42.5
-2.5
-6.0
-2.4
0.0
-6.0
-1.6
-2.0
-1.0
74.7
31,868
3.0

42.2
-1.9
-6.3
-0.2
0.0
-6.3
-0.2
-1.8
0.1
77.8
33,716
3.0

42.0
-1.4
-6.4
-0.2
0.0
-6.4
-0.2
-1.7
0.2
80.6
35,665
3.0

11,411
10,043
12,666
11,638
0
-227
-1,256

12,077
10,654
13,069
11,970
0
107
-992

11,986
10,233
13,141
11,959
26
54
-1,128

11,968
10,224
13,101
12,008
64
23
-1,069

12,000
10,224
13,468
12,375
3,088
2,713
1,620

12,440
10,568
14,013
12,912
0
-472
-1,572

12,579
10,597
14,872
13,545
0
-965
-2,293

13,352
11,255
15,762
14,243
0
-891
-2,410

14,187
11,969
16,709
14,990
0
-803
-2,521

1/ Data are classified following the ESA'95 methodology, as reported to the European Commission.
2/ Including social security contributions.
44.5
3/ For 2012-2014, all non-interest expenditure categories are projected using the potential GDP projected growth rate.

43.3

42.9

42.5

42.2

42.0

Unidentified measures
General government balance (excl. transfer of pension assets)
Transfer of assets from the 2nd to the 1st pillar of the pension system)
General government balance
Primary balance
Convergence program overall balance
Gap to convergence program
Memorandum items:
Primary expenditure 3/
Output gap (in percent of potential GDP)
Cyclically-adjusted overall balance (CAB, in percent of potential GDP)
Change in CAB
One-off items (net)
Structural balance (in percent of potential GDP)
Change in the structural balance
Primary structural balance (in percent of potential GDP)
Change in the primary structural balance
Gross public debt
GDP, in current prices (forint billions, yearly)
Real GDP growth (in percent)
In nominal terms (HUF billions)
Total revenue
Of which tax revenues
Total expenditure
Of which primary expenditure
Transfer of assets
Primary balance
Overall balance
Sources: Hungarian authorities; and staff estimates.

41
Table 9. Hungary: Central Government Financing Needs and Sources, 2009-11
(in billion of forints)
2010

2009

Net financing requirement

2011

1,597

504

-1,669

889
-34
743

896
152
-545

-1,688
171
-153

1,596

476

-1,669

916

463

1,257

Gross issuance (actual and planned)
In Hungarian forints 2/
In foreign currency 2/

7,672
5,675
1,997

6,446
5,995
451

6,210
5,059
1,151

Repayments
In Hungarian forints 2/
In foreign currency (euro) 2/

6,756
6,445
312

5,983
5,614
369

4,953
3,936
1,017

Change in government holdings of repos

-4

-6

0

Drawing on deposits with banking system
Deposits in forints 3/
Deposits in foreign currencies 4/

684
-120
804

19
29
-10

-1,382
-832
-550

0

0

-1,544

1

27

0

Overall deficit of the central government system (cash basis)
Net EU transfers
Other factors 1/
Net Financing
Net debt issuance

Public debt redemption (private pension assets) 5/
Residual/valuation
Source: AKK data and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Extension/reimbursement of loans by the government, and other operations affecting the central
government deposits.
2/ In 2011 the decline in repayments from the redemption of pension assets is a staff estimate. It is computed as
the outstanding repayment obligations prior to the pension reform minus the prorrated share of holdings of
government assets in the pension system.
3/ In 2011 includes accumulation of assets other than government bonds denominated in HUF from the redemption
of assets under the pension reform.
4/ In 2011 includes accumulation of assets other than government bonds denominated in foreign currency from the
redemption of assets under the pension reform.
5/ Reffers to governemnt bonds held by pension administrators redeemed under the pension reform.

42
Table 10. Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector, 2006-10
(In percent unless otherwise indicated, end of period)

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets 1/
Capital (net worth) to assets
Asset composition and quality
Annual growth of bank loans 2/
Sectoral distribution of bank loans (in % of total)
Corporates
o/w in foreign currency
Households
o/w in foreign currency
Other loans
o/w in foreign currency
Financial institutions
Central government
Nonresidents
Other
Denomination of FX loans to corporates
EUR
USD
CHF
Other
NPLs to gross loans 3/
Provisions to NPLs 3/
NPLs net of provisions to capital 3/
Earnings and profitability
ROA (after tax) 4/
ROE (after tax) 4/
Income Share (in % of Total)
Net interest income to gross income
Trading and fee income to total income
Noninterest expenses to gross income
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Spread between loan and deposit rates 4/
Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to short term liabilities
Loans to deposits
FX liabilities to total liabilities (own capital is excluded)
Sensitivity to market risk
Net open position in FX to capital
Source: Magyar Nemzeti Bank.
1/ Capital Adequency Ratio
2/ Method of calculation: annual growth 2007 = (2007-2006)/2006*100.
3/ Definition 90 days + overdue, full portfolio
4/ Annualized

2006

2007

2008

2009

End-Sep 2010

11.0
8.3

10.4
8.2

11.2
8.0

13.1
8.3

13.2
8.7

18.4

22.1

43.2
20.3
31.5
14.8
25.3
19.1
11.3
0.5
6.2
7.2

39.8
20.9
32.7
19.3
27.5
22.5
10.7
0.5
9.1
7.2

20.9
19,874,675.0
35.3
21.3
36.0
25.4
28.7
25.0
9.5
0.2
12.2
6.8

-8.5
18,194,247.0
34.8
21.3
37.0
26.0
28.2
24.1
9.2
0.2
12.5
6.4

-1.8
18,088,099.0
33.7
20.5
38.9
27.5
27.3
22.7
8.6
0.4
11.6
6.7

70.8
4.6
24.4
0.2
2.6
57.1
8.9

67.6
4.9
26.4
1.0
2.3
64.8
6.8

66.9
4.1
27.8
1.1
3.0
58.9
11.3

75.2
3.4
20.6
0.9
6.7
53.7
23.8

75.8
3.3
20.0
0.9
9.3
53.3
33.2

1.5
23.8

1.2
18.4

0.8
11.6

0.7
9.4

0.4
4.4

64.7
32.3
48.7
3.5

61.3
36.1
50.2
3.2

56.0
30.7
50.4
49.4
2.6

55.7
38.9
43.3
48.2
2.3

62.0
31.5
40.3
47.7
2.7

20.0
36.8
109.9
39.3

16.4
30.5
121.6
42.4

29,258,830.0
15.6
31.4
125.1
45.6

22.7
45.2
115.1
47.1

22.1
44.1
112.9
45.6

7.2

6.0

13.7
321,961

16.4
404,528

14.6
363,687

Table 11. Hungary: Indicators of Fund Credit, 2008-16
(In millions of SDR)
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Existing and prospective Fund credit
Disbursement
Stock 1/
Obligations
Repurchase
Charges

4215
4215
0
0
0

3422
7637
148
0
148

0
7637
186
0
186

0
7637
186
0
186

0
4417
3384
3220
164

0
598
3878
3819
59

0
0
603
598
5

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

Stock of existing and prospective Fund credit
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of gross reserves

405.9
4.3
5.2
18.8

735.5
9.1
11.8
27.6

735.5
9.0
10.5
26.2

735.5
8.7
9.6
23.2

425.3
4.8
5.1
13.8

57.6
0.6
0.6
1.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

14.2
0.2
0.2
0.5

17.9
0.2
0.3
0.6

17.9
0.2
0.2
0.6

325.9
3.7
3.9
10.5

373.4
4.0
4.1
12.6

58.1
0.6
0.6
1.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Obligations to the Fund from existing and prospective Fund arrangements
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of gross reserves
Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ End of period. Calculated based on proposed extension and rephasing of purchases.

43

2008

44

APPENDIX I

Appendix Figure 1. Hungary: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
150
140
130

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)
Baseline

50

150

133 45

140

Historical

40

120

35
115

110
100

30
25

90
80

20

70

15

60
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

10
2015

130

140

128

130

115

100
90
Baseline assumption: 4.5
Scenario assumption: 4.9

80
70
60
2005

Historical average:
2007

2009

2011

2013

5.1
2015

Non-interest current account shock
(in percent of GDP)
CA shock

140
130

122

120

120
Baseline

110

115

Baseline

110

115

100

100

90

90
Baseline assumption: 2.9
Scenario assumption: 0.9

80
70
60
2005

Baseline

110

150

Growth
shock

117

120

Growth shock (in percent per year)
150

i-rate
shock

Historical average:
2007

2009

2011

2013

2.6
2015

Baseline assumption: 4.3
Scenario assumption: 2.7
Historical average:
-3.2

80
70
60
2005

Combined shock 2/

2007

2009

2013

2015

Real depreciation shock 3/
200

150

30 %
depreciation

Combined
shock

140

2011

180
126

130

160

120
Baseline

110

115

100

164

140
Baseline

120

90

115

100

80
80

70
60
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

60
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation
shocks. Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the
baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current
account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2011.

Appendix Table 1. Hungary: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005-15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1/
2005

1 Baseline: External debt
2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative) 2/
9
Automatic debt dynamics 3/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 4/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 5/
External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

81.0

96.5

103.2

116.0

146.2

144.2

139.5

131.2

122.8

117.9

114.8

8.8
-2.0
4.6
1.6
67.7
69.3
-5.0
-1.7
3.2
-0.9
-4.0
10.8

15.5
2.8
4.4
1.4
77.1
78.5
-2.4
0.9
3.2
-2.6
0.3
12.7

6.7
2.0
3.2
-0.9
80.3
79.4
4.6
-5.8
3.7
-0.7
-8.8
4.7

12.8
0.5
1.9
-0.4
81.3
80.9
-1.3
-0.2
5.4
-0.8
-4.7
12.3

30.2
13.3
-4.9
-5.1
77.2
72.1
-1.0
19.2
5.3
8.9
5.0
16.9

-2.0
-4.1
-5.8
-6.5
86.0
79.5
-1.3
3.1
4.6
-1.6
...
2.1

-4.7
-7.2
-5.8
-5.7
90.9
85.2
-3.1
1.8
5.7
-3.9
...
2.5

-8.4
-6.2
-5.1
-5.1
94.8
89.7
-2.9
1.8
5.7
-3.9
...
-2.1

-8.4
-5.7
-4.5
-4.7
98.5
93.8
-3.1
1.9
5.6
-3.7
...
-2.7

-4.9
-4.3
-3.5
-3.9
100.6
96.6
-2.8
2.0
5.4
-3.4
...
-0.5

-3.1
-3.1
-2.4
-3.0
102.5
99.5
-2.7
2.0
5.3
-3.3
...
0.0

119.6

125.2

128.5

142.7

189.5

167.7

153.5

138.3

124.6

117.3

112.0

26.5
30.0

28.7
32.0

30.9
30.6

35.7
33.5

35.1
37.8

38.6
39.7

44.0
43.6

45.9
43.0

47.8
42.3

50.4
42.2

49.3
39.0

144.2

143.2

139.7

136.1

134.2

132.6

1.1
3.7
3.3
17.0
15.7
5.8
1.3

2.8
0.9
4.1
9.6
11.2
5.8
3.1

3.0
2.4
4.3
10.0
11.1
5.1
2.9

3.0
2.8
4.5
10.0
10.7
4.5
3.1

3.0
2.8
4.7
8.0
8.9
3.5
2.8

3.0
2.7
4.8
7.8
9.0
2.4
2.7

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 7/
-3.8

45

Gross external financing need (in billions of euros) 6/
in percent of GDP

2006

-7.4

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline 8/
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in euros (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (euro terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (euro terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

1.3
6.3
4.7
12.2
10.3
-4.6
5.0

3.3
-1.9
4.1
15.4
14.7
-4.4
2.4

0.8
11.3
4.3
16.9
13.6
-3.2
-4.6

0.8
4.8
5.5
6.9
7.7
-1.9
1.3

-6.7
-6.5
4.0
-17.2
-22.3
4.9
1.0

1/ Excluding Special Purpose Entities. Including inter-company loans and nonresidents' holdings of forint-denominated assets.
2/ Includes EU capital transfers.
3/ Derived as [r - g - (1+g) + (1+r)]/(1+g++g) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; = change in domestic GDP deflator in euro terms, g = real GDP
growth rate,  = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and  = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
4/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-(1+g(1+r1+g++g) times previous period debt stock. increases with an appreciating domestic currency (> 0) and rising inflation
(based on GDP deflator).
5/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
8/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

46
Appendix Figure 2. Hungary: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
100
90

35

Gross financing need under
baseline (right scale)
Baseline
Historical

80

30

100
90

i-rate
shock

80
25

70

70

Baseline

20
60

60
15

50
40
2004

10
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

40
2004

Growth shock (in percent per year)
100

90

90
Growth
shock

70

2006

2008

Baseline assumption: 2.6
Scenario assumption: 1.0
2.2
Historical average:
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

No policy change
after 2009

70
PB
shock

60

60

40
2004

2012

80

Baseline

50

2010

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

100

80

Baseline assumption: 3.2
Scenario assumption: 4.2
1.5
Historical average:

50

2014

Baseline

Baseline assumption: 0.0
Scenario assumption:-1.1
Historical average: -1.6

50
40
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
100

100
Combined shock

90

90

30 %
depreciation

80

80
Baseline

70

70

60

60

50

50

40
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

40
2004

Baseline
contingent
liabilities
shock

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks.
Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being
presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2009,
with real depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local
currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Appendix Table 2. Hungary: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005-15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

1 Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

61.8
17.4

65.6
18.5

66.1
18.6

72.3
26.1

78.4
33.4

79.5
33.9

69.8
32.5

71.5
29.3

74.7
28.8

77.8
28.3

80.6
28.4

2.4
5.2
3.7
42.3
46.0
3.4
0.6
2.9
-2.3
2.8
-2.0
-2.0
0.0
0.0
-2.8

3.8
1.7
5.4
42.6
48.0
-2.4
-0.7
1.6
-2.3
-1.7
-1.2
-1.2
0.0
0.0
2.1

0.4
-0.8
0.9
45.1
46.0
-1.7
0.1
-1.4
1.5
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3

6.2
2.5
-0.4
45.1
44.7
2.9
0.6
1.1
-0.5
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8

6.1
6.4
-0.1
46.0
45.9
6.5
6.5
1.5
5.0
-1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

1.1
1.5
0.2
44.3
44.5
1.3
1.3
2.2
-0.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

-9.6
-10.0
-9.5
52.9
43.3
-0.5
-0.5
1.6
-2.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

1.6
1.6
1.6
41.3
42.9
0.0
0.0
2.0
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.2
3.2
3.0
39.5
42.5
0.2
0.2
2.2
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.1
3.1
2.6
39.6
42.2
0.4
0.4
2.5
-2.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.8
2.8
2.3
39.8
42.0
0.6
0.6
2.8
-2.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

146.3

154.1

146.6

160.2

170.4

179.2

132.2

172.9

189.2

196.3

202.5

24.6
27.2

24.3
27.5

18.7
25.9

16.6
26.0

18.3
23.7

17.8
23.1

7.9
10.7

30.4
43.2

23.9
35.9

24.4
38.5

23.7
39.3

79.5
79.5

78.9
79.5

77.9
79.7

76.9
80.1

76.0
80.7

75.0
81.5

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2009-2015
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit
Memorandum item
Growth of real public debt

4.0
7.4
5.2
-15.6
2.2
7.2
3.7

4.0
6.9
3.0
11.5
3.9
8.6
5.4

-2.5
6.6
-2.6
11.0
9.2
-6.6
0.9

0.8
6.6
1.8
-11.2
4.8
-1.9
-0.4

-6.7
6.1
1.7
4.8
4.4
-4.3
-0.1

1.1
5.3
2.9
...
2.4
-1.9
0.2

2.8
5.1
2.2
...
2.9
0.2
-9.5

3.0
5.5
3.1
...
2.4
1.9
1.6

3.0
6.2
3.4
...
2.8
2.0
3.0

3.0
6.4
3.6
...
2.8
2.3
2.6

3.0
6.6
3.9
...
2.7
2.5
2.3

7.0

7.8

-0.2

11.7

0.0

1.2

-10.3

4.3

7.4

6.9

6.4

1/ General government gross debt.
2/ Derived as [(r - (1+g - g + (1+r]/(1+g++g)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate;  = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate;  = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and  = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
0.7

-1.0
0.7

47

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

2006

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
HUNGARY
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Proposal for Post-Program Monitoring—Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department
January 11, 2011
Contents

Page

Appendix
I.
Fund Relations ......................................................................................................... 2

II.

Statistical Issues....................................................................................................... 4

2
APPENDIX I. HUNGARY: FUND RELATIONS
(As of January 10, 2011)
I.

Membership Status: Joined on May 6, 1982; Article VIII.

II.

General Resources Account:
SDR Million
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

1,038.40
8,601.57
73.83

100.00
828.35
7.11

SDR Million

Percent of
Allocation

SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

991.05
749.64

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
SDR Million
Stand-By Arrangements

V.

Date of
Arrangement

Stand-by
Stand-by
Stand-by

Percent
of Quota
735.46

11/6/08
3/15/96
9/15/93

Expiration
Date
10/5/10
2/14/98
12/14/94

Amount
Amount
Approved
Drawn
(SDR Million) (SDR Million)
10,537.50
264.18
340.00

7,637.00
0.00
56.70

Projected Payments to Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present
holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming
2011
2012
2013
2014
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

7,637.00

100.00
75.64

Financial Arrangements:
Type

VI.

Percent
of Quota

3,220.19
196.83
173.47
196.83 3,393.65

3,818.50
64.03
3,882.53

598.31
5.99
604.30

Exchange Rate Arrangement:
The de facto exchange rate arrangement for the Hungarian forint is floating, effective
November 1st, 2008.

3
VIII.

Article IV Consultations:
Hungary is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV Board discussion took
place on September 17, 2008. The associated Executive Board assessment is available
at http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pn/2008/pn08124.htm and the staff report and
selected issues papers at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=22374.0
and http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=22375.0. Hungary has
accepted the obligations of Article VIII and maintains an exchange rate system free of
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers on current international
transactions except for those maintained solely for the preservation of national or
international security and that have been notified to the Fund pursuant to Executive
Board Decision No. 144-(52/51).

IX.
Year
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010
2010
X.

Technical Assistance:
Department.
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
MCM
FAD
LEG
FAD
FAD
MCM
FAD
MCM

Purpose
Tax policy
Public financial management
Tax administration
Pension reform
Tax administration
Tax administration
Banking Supervision
Tax administration
Bank resolution framework
Tax administration
Expenditure Rationalization
Macro Modeling
Tax Revenue Forecasting
Macro Modeling

Date
April
June
October
May
October
March
July
August
September
November
June
July
September
November

Resident Representative: Ms. Iryna Ivaschenko assumed her duties on May 1, 2009.

4
APPENDIX II. HUNGARY—STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of January 10, 2011
I. ASSESSMENT OF DATA ADEQUACY FOR SURVEILLANCE
General: Data provision is adequate for surveillance
Government Finance Statistics: Data reporting on fiscal accounting needs to be improved further.
The monthly cash-basis accounts of the central government prepared by the Ministry of Finance and
National Economy do not reflect the GFS presentation. This complicates staff’s ability to analyze
trends and to appropriately anticipate the impact on general government accounts. Data on revenue
and expenditure arrears has been redily provided by the authorities upon request, but provision of this
data on an automatic basis would facilitate the monitoring of obligations on an accrual basis.
Similarly, automatic provision of local government revenues and expenditures, as well as of financial
statements of state-owned enterprises (an important source of contingent liabilities), would allow for
closer regular monitoring of the general government. Currently, in the absence of a specific request
for this information, local government finances can only be monitored from the financing flows as
compiled by the central bank.
II. DATA STANDARDS AND QUALITY
Subscriber to the Fund’s Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) since May, 1996

Hungary published its original ROSC Data
Module in 2001 and updates are available on the
IMF internet web site. The latest update is
Hungary: Report on the Observance of Standards
and Codes—Data Module, 2004 Update (July
2004).

Hungary: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As January 10, 2011
Date of latest
observation
Exchange Rates

Date
received

Frequency
of
7
Data

Frequency 7of
Reporting

Frequency of
7
publication

1/7/2011

1/7/2011

D and M

D and M

D and M

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities
of the Monetary
1
Authorities

Dec 2010

1/7/2011

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Nov 2010

12/31/2010

M

M

M

Broad Money

Nov 2010

12/31/2010

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Nov 2010

12/31/2010

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

Nov 2010

12/31/2010

M

M

M

Interest Rates

2

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
8
Methodological soundness

Data Quality Accuracy
9
and reliability

O,O,LO,LO

O,O,O,O,LO

1/5/2011

M

M

M

1/14/2011

M

M

M

O,O,O,O

O,O,O,O,NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition4of Financing – General
Government

2009

4/1/2010

A

A

A

O,LNO,LO,O

LO,O,O,O,NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

Dec 2010

1/10/11

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and
5
Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

Q3 2010

1/3/2011

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

Q3 2010

12/30/2010

Q

Q

Q

O,LO,LO,LO

O,O,O,O,NA

Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

Q3 2010

12/30/2010

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

Q3 2010

12/9/2010

Q

Q

Q

O,O,O,LO

O,LO,O,O,NA

Q3 2010

12/30/2010

Q

Q

Q

Q3 2010

12/30/2010

Gross External Debt
International investment Position
1

6

5

Dec 2010
Dec 2010

Consumer Price Index

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC and Substantive Update published in May 2001 and July 2004, respectively, and based on the findings of the respective missions that took place during January 2001 and January 2004 for the
dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively) concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely
observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
9
Same as footnote 8, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision
studies
2
3

Statement by the Staff Representative on the Hungary
Executive Board Meeting
January 31, 2011
1.
This statement provides information that has become available since the issuance
of the staff report (EBS/11/8). The new information does not alter the thrust of the staff
appraisal.
2.
Based on preliminary Central Government data, the authorities 2010 fiscal deficit
target of 3.8 percent of GDP was just about met in cash terms. The budget outcome in
ESA95 terms is expected to be available only in mid-2011.
3.
The dismantling of the second pension pillar is proceeding as planned. According
to the law passed in December, all second pillar assets are automatically transferred to the first
pillar unless the individual contributor actively opts out. Thus far, only some 40,000 out of a
total of 3.1 million private pension fund members have done so, suggesting that virtually all
second pillar pension assets will be transferred to the state.
4.
The authorities announced elements of the structural reform package to be
formally discussed by the government in February. According to initial statements, the
reforms could include better targeted social benefits, a redesign of drug subsidies, and
broadening of the tax base. Several of the proposals appear in line with guidance from past
IMF technical assistance and recommendations under the 2008–10 Stand-By Arrangement.
Depending on the size and nature of these measures, the package could help address debt
sustainability concerns raised in the staff report. Staff’s assessment will be provided as part of
the first post-program monitoring report.
5.
On January 24, the Central Bank increased the policy rate by 25 basis points to
6 percent. The press statement cited cost-push shocks amid unanchored inflation expectations
as driving the decision. Inflation rose to 4.6 percent in December (above the 4.4 percent
consensus and 3 percent center target), driven largely by food and energy prices but also an
incipient upward trend in core inflation. Amid still high unemployment of 11 percent, real
wage growth was roughly flat. However, the annual collective wage negotiation in December,
which agreed to recommend a general wage increase of 4–6 percent for 2011, could provide
upward pressure going forward.
6.
The latest balance of payments data suggest that Hungary, unlike regional peers,
experienced net capital outflows in both Q2 and Q3, 2010. This reflects, inter alia, a further
decline of parent banks’ funding of their Hungarian subsidiaries. According to preliminary
data, at end-December 2010 aggregate funding of the six subsidiaries that had participated in
European Bank Coordination Initiative (EBCI) stood at 120 percent of end-September 2008
level, compared to peak exposure of 140 percent at end-July 2010. The counterpart of the
funding decline has been a reduction banks’ liquid assets, especially central bank bills.
7.
Prime Minister Orban publicly stated that the government is considering to
partially repay the IMF early. While timing and amount are still unclear, technical staff have
indicated that the government may tap foreign exchange deposits at the MNB earmarked for
contingent bank funding (€3 billion or roughly one third of outstanding IMF debt) to finance
the repayment. Such a move would reduce Hungary’s fiscal and foreign exchange reserve
buffers while paying down low cost debt. At present, Hungary’s official reserves stand at
€33 billion, equivalent to 81 percent of short term debt.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/15
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 3, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Proposal for Post-Program Monitoring with Hungary
On January 31, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation and Proposal for Post-Program Monitory with Hungary. 1
Background
Hungary was hit hard by the global crisis, given large underlying vulnerabilities and
considerable integration with international markets. The adoption of a sustainable fiscal stance
and policies to safeguard financial stability in the context of substantial assistance from the
IMF and European Union helped avoid a financial meltdown, but could not avert a deep
recession. Economic output fell nearly 7 percent in 2009 because the global retrenchment in
trade sharply reduced exports while financial strains and limited policy space weighed on
domestic demand.
The economy has begun to rebound with exports increasing for six consecutive quarters and
employment rising since February 2010. More recently, signs of a pick-up in private
consumption have also emerged. As a result, GDP growth is expected to be around 1 percent
in 2010 and the sharp correction in the current account, which reached a surplus early in the
year, has begun to slow. The recovery is nonetheless fragile and large vulnerabilities persist.
In this environment, risk premia remain elevated and volatile.

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.
1

2
The government that took office in mid-2010 has used its considerable political mandate to
fundamentally reorient fiscal policies. Following the considerable structural fiscal adjustment by
the previous government, the new authorities embarked on tax cuts and targeted support to
small and medium-sized enterprises, aimed at jumpstarting growth. The government has
sought to maintain its previously agreed deficit target of 3.8 percent in 2010 via temporary
levies on primarily foreign-owned financial institutions, retail chains, telecommunication and
energy companies, as well as the diversion of second pillar private pension contributions to the
budget. The government is not seeking a renewal of the now expired IMF/EU-supported
program.
The financial sector has remained resilient throughout the crisis. After initial strains in late
2008, banks substantially increased liquidity and capitalization to adequate levels. However,
more recently, profitability has begun to fall sharply amid rising non-performing loans. As the
financial sector began to stabilize in early 2009, the Central Bank (MNB) reduced the policy
rate by over 600 basis points from a crisis high of 11.50 percent. The MNB paused in mid2010 and has tightened interest rates by 50 basis points since November in response to a
sharp rise in risk premia and higher headline inflation prints.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the ongoing recovery of the Hungarian economy in the
aftermath of a sharp fall in output in 2009 and welcomed the improvement in capital and
liquidity financial indicators. Given the still fragile state of the economy and continued large
vulnerabilities, notably the dependence on foreign funding, Directors underscored the
importance of implementing a consistent medium-term macroeconomic framework that
reduces uncertainty and lowers risk spreads.
Directors noted that the main challenge will be to establish a sustainable fiscal stance over the
medium term. While the recent tax reduction could improve competitiveness, it also entails a
substantial fiscal cost. Directors stressed that measures taken thus far to offset this revenue
loss, including levies on select industries, are in large part temporary and distortionary. They
noted that the unwinding of the defined-benefit private pension pillar, in particular, is a source
of concern as it increases medium-term fiscal risks while reducing transparency.
Directors pointed toward a need for durable expenditure rationalization in the near term,
notably better targeting of social benefits and restructuring of state-owned transportation
companies. In this context, they welcomed the authorities’ plan to detail a comprehensive set
of structural fiscal reforms in February.
Directors underscored the importance of addressing financial sector vulnerabilities.The
ongoing rise in credit losses, driven in part by the impact of the strong Swiss Franc on the
balance sheets of households indebted in foreign currency, has placed new burdens on banks.
In this context, Directors welcomed efforts to support distressed mortgage holders, as long as
moral hazard and fiscal costs are contained. They noted that bank earnings are already under
pressure due to the disproportionately large levy on assets that could also dampen credit
growth and undermine the economic recovery.

3

Directors welcomed action to strengthen the legal authority of the Hungarian Financial
Supervisory Agency. They noted, however, that the weakening of the Financial Stability
Council reduces the capacity to monitor and control systemic risk.
Directors noted that the central bank’s recent tightening amid elevated risk premia and
incipient price pressures helped anchor inflation expectations and protect the financial sector.
However, Directors underscored that there is still substantial slack in the economy, as
evidenced in particular by high unemployment. They emphasized that a sound medium-term
fiscal framework would create room for monetary easing.
Directors expressed concern over the weakening of economic governance, noting that steps to
lessen the independence of both the Fiscal and the Monetary Policy Councils and the reduced
role of the Constitutional Court in assessing budgetary matters undermine key checks and
balances. Directors underscored that these steps run counter to the authorities’ stated goal of
restoring investor confidence and lowering borrowing costs.
Directors welcomed the use of post-program monitoring, which will maintain a close policy
dialogue between the Hungarian authorities and the Fund.
standard 12-month cycle.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2010 Article IV Consultation with Hungary is also available.

4
Hungary: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–11
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP
Total domestic demand 1/
Private consumption
Gross fixed investment

3.3

0.8

0.8

-6.7

1.1

2.8

0.3
2.1
-3.2

-2.3
-1.7
1.7

0.7
0.6
2.9

-12.6
-6.8
-8.0

-2.4
-2.3
-2.5

2.3
2.1
0.7

3.0
18.7
14.9

3.0
16.2
13.3

0.2
5.7
5.8

5.9
-9.6
-14.6

3.5
13.8
11.9

0.6
8.9
9.4

CPI (end year)
CPI (average)

6.5
3.9

7.4
7.9

3.5
6.1

5.6
4.2

4.2
4.9

3.9
4.1

Unemployment rate (average, in percent)

7.5

7.4

7.8

10.1

11.1

11.2

24.0

23.5

23.7

19.2

18.3

18.8

16.4

16.6

16.4

18.7

19.5

19.0

General government (percent of GDP), ESA-95
basis 3/
Overall balance
Primary balance
Primary structural balance
Debt

-9.3
-5.4
-6.1
65.7

-5.0
-0.9
-0.9
66.1

-3.7
0.4
0.2
72.3

-4.4
0.3
2.8
78.4

-4.0
0.1
0.8
79.5

5.6
9.5
-0.3
69.9

Money and credit (end-of-period, percent change)
Broad money
Lending to the private sector, flow-based

13.6
20.6

11.0
18.5

8.8
12.2

3.4
-2.3

4.1
1.0

8.3
5.0

7.0
7.4

7.6
7.0

8.9
9.3

8.9
9.3

...
...

...
...

-1.4
-7.6
16.4
96.5

0.9
-6.9
16.4
103.2

0.4
-7.3
24.0
116.0

5.1
-0.5
30.7
146.2

6.5
1.2
33.5
144.2

5.7
0.1
38.0
139.5

Floating
Ft 207.3 = US$1; Ft. 274.4 = €1
99.6
100.9
91.8
...
106.4
110.2
103.8
...

…
…

Foreign balance 1/
Exports
Imports

Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP) 2/
Gross national saving (percent of GDP, from
BOP)

Interest rates (percent)
T-bill (90-day, average)
Government bond yield (5-year, average)
Balance of payments
Goods and services trade balance (percent of
GDP)
Current account (percent of GDP)
Reserves (in billions of euros)
Gross external debt (percent of GDP) 4/
Exchange rate
Exchange regime
Present rate (December 15, 2010)
Nominal effective rate (2005=100)
Real effective rate, CPI basis (2005=100)
Quota at the Fund

93.9
95.4

SDR 1038.4 million

Sources: Hungarian authorities; IMF, International Financial Statistics; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth. Calculated using 2000 prices. It includes change in inventories.
2/ Includes change in inventories.
3/ Consists of the central budget, social security funds, extrabudgetary funds, and local governments. It includes the
IMF staff assessment of the impact of all government announced measures (October 2010), including the full amount
of the bank levy in 2011.
4/ Excluding Special Purpose Entities. Including inter-company loans, and nonresident holdings of forint-denominated
assets.

