© 2011 International Monetary Fund

June 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/130

April 26, 2011
May 11, 2011
May 11, 2011
March 2, 2011
2011
May 11, 2011
Republic of Tajikistan: 2011 Article IV Consultation, Fourth Review Under the Three–Year
Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Waiver of Nonobservance for
Performance Criteria and Modification of Performance Criterion—Staff Report; Staff Supplement;
and Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members,
usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2011 Article IV consultation with the
Republic of Tajikistan and the Fourth Review Under the Three–Year Arrangement Under the Extended
Credit Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the combined 2011 Article IV consultation and Fourth Review Under the
Three–Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Waiver of
Nonobservance for Performance Criteria and Modification of Performance Criterion, prepared by a
staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on March 2, 2011, with the officials of the
Republic of Tajikistan on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at
the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on April 26, 2011. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Executive Board of the IMF.



A supplement containing the Debt Sustainability Analysis



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the Executive
Board as expressed during its May 11, 2011, discussion of the staff report on issues related to the
Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.



A statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Tajikistan

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the Republic of Tajikistan*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of the
Republic of Tajikistan*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, Fourth Review Under the Three–
Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Waiver of
Nonobservance for Performance Criteria and Modification of Performance Criterion.
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by David Owen and Dhaneshwar Ghura
April 26, 2011
Mission: Discussions were held in Dushanbe during February 17–March 2, 2011 for the
2011 Article IV Consultation and the fourth review under the three-year arrangement under
the Extended Credit Facility (ECF).
Team: Messrs. Schneider (head), Junius, Al-Eyd, and Ms. Unigovskaya (all MCD), and Ms.
Bal Gunduz (SPR). Mr. Aisen, the resident representative, assisted the mission.
Key Tajik officials: President Mr. Rahmon, Head of President’s Office Mr. Davlatov,
Minister of Finance Mr. Nadjmuddinov, National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) Chairman
Mr. Rahimzoda, and Minister of Economic Development and Trade Mr. Hamraliev.
Fund relations: A three-year, US$116 million (90 percent of quota) arrangement under the
ECF was approved by the IMF’s Executive Board on April 21, 2009, and augmented to
US$152 million (120 percent of quota) on June 7, 2010 (EBS/10/95).
Exchange system: Tajikistan has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections
2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers
for current international transactions. The exchange rate regime has been classified as
stabilized since June 2009.
ECF: With one exception, all quantitative performance criteria through end-December
2010 were met. In the Letter of Intent (LOI), the authorities outline new structural
benchmarks, updating the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) of
November 9, 2010.
Data: Despite some weaknesses, data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance.
Tajikistan participates in the GDDS.
Outreach: The mission met with local representatives of the donor community, including the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank, and the European Union, and briefed
members of the diplomatic community. The mission also gave a press briefing.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Overview: Recovery Gains Ground but Challenges Remain .................................................4
A. Growth Returns, Inflation Rises................................................................................4
B. External Accounts—Temporary Shift to Surplus .....................................................5
C. Financial Sector—Post-Crisis Problems Remain......................................................6
D. Policy Stance .............................................................................................................6
II. Medium-Term Outlook .......................................................................................................10
III. Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................10
A. Coping with Price Shocks .......................................................................................11
B. Financial Sector—Vulnerabilities and Policies.......................................................12
C. Maintaining Fiscal and Debt Sustainability ............................................................13
IV. Program Review and Policies for 2011 .............................................................................17
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................19
Boxes
1. Exchange Rate Analysis ........................................................................................................8
2. Financial Sector Developments .............................................................................................9
3. Medium-Term Fiscal Sustainability ....................................................................................15
4. Financial Market Developments ..........................................................................................16
5. State Enterprise Sector and the Problem of Arrears ............................................................23
6. Financing the Agricultural Sector ........................................................................................24
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–16 ..............................................................................25
2. General Government Operations, 2007–11 .........................................................................26
3. General Government Operations, 2007–11 .........................................................................27
4. Accounts of the National Bank of Tajikistan, 2007–11 .......................................................27
5. Monetary Survey, 2007–11..................................................................................................29
6. Balance of Payments, 2008–16 ............................................................................................30
7. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2008–15 ...................................................31
8. Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–20 .................................................................................32
9. Reviews and Disbursements under the Three-Year ECF Arrangement, 2009–12 ..............33
10. Financial Soundness Indicators, 2004–10..........................................................................34
Attachments
I. Letter of Intent ......................................................................................................................35
II. Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) for 2009-12 ..........................43
III. Technical Memorandum of Understanding .......................................................................54

3
Executive Summary
Background: Tajikistan is emerging from the global crisis, with real GDP growth rising to
6.5 percent in 2010, up from 3.9 percent in 2009. A strong policy response, supported by a
devaluation of the somoni, helped to facilitate adjustment, but a quick return to pre-crisis
growth rates appears unlikely. The external balances improved markedly in 2010, but due to
temporary factors. Inflation is now sharply on the rise, reaching nearly 10 percent by end2010, and rising further thus far in 2011. Program performance is generally good but the
continuous criterion on non-accumulation of new external payment arrears was not met. Staff
proposes a waiver for nonobservance of this performance criterion.
Policy Challenges: Tajikistan’s principal economic challenge remains creating and
sustaining levels of economic growth necessary to reduce poverty and unemployment, while
also working within domestic and external resource constraints.
Key Recommendations:


Maintain a prudent monetary stance to avoid adding pressure to core inflation. Over
the medium term, develop a cash transfer system to protect the poor during price
shocks.



Address vulnerabilities in the financial sector, with a view to reducing the overhang
of nonperforming loans, creating confidence in the banking system, and enabling
higher levels of financial intermediation.



Shift to a post-crisis view of fiscal policy. Gradually reduce the fiscal deficit to allow
for a rebuilding of fiscal buffers. Reform the tax policy regime to help build revenues,
make space for priority social and infrastructure spending, and create a more
conducive environment for private sector growth.



Continue work on agricultural reform, with a particular emphasis on creating a
sustainable mechanism for agricultural finance.



Make further progress in development of domestic financial markets, starting with the
domestic Treasury-bill (T-bill) market.

4
I. OVERVIEW: RECOVERY GAINS GROUND BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN
A. Growth Returns, Inflation Rises
1.
Economic activity has recovered, but a return to pre-crisis growth rates appears
unlikely. Tajikistan registered real GDP growth of 6.5 percent in 2010, up from 3.9 percent
in 2009. Stronger hydroelectricity production helped to boost industrial activity, while trade
and services benefited from a recovery of inward remittance flows (reflecting Russia’s
economic rebound). Construction also increased during the second half of the year. The
upturn in GDP suggests that Tajikistan is emerging from the effects of the global crisis.
However, a return to pre-crisis growth rates (which ranged as high as 10 percent during
2001–08) seems unlikely given that such growth was fueled in part by significant increases in
remittances (based on large emigration) which may not be sustainable going forward.
2.
Inflation remained in the low single digits through the first half of 2010, but
began to rise thereafter in line with international commodity prices—particularly grain
and flour. Headline inflation reached 9.8 percent by the end of the year, with food and fuel
prices accounting for the bulk of the increase.1 Core inflation (excluding food and fuel)
actually fell through the course of the year, but on an annual average basis was roughly
steady compared with 2009. No second-round effects have yet emerged, as the authorities
exercised restraint on increases in civil service wages and salaries in 2010.
35

Sector Contributions to GDP growth
(In percent)

14

CPI (Percentage Growth)
Overall CPI (y/y)
Overall CPI (Annual Average)
Food CPI (y/y)

30

12
10

25

8
20

6
4

15

2
10

0
-2
-4

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
5

Industry
Construction
GDP

Agriculture
Services

0
Jan-09

May-09

Sep-09

Jan-10

May-10

Sep-10

3.
Tajikistan remains one of the poorest countries in the region and lags behind in
a range of social and governance indices. Real per capita GDP has only recently regained
the ground lost during the civil war, rising to a level (in PPP terms) comparable with such
1

Data suggest that a large part of the external shocks are being passed through to domestic inflation. An
increase in the world food price of 27 percent in 2010, for example, has translated into an increase in domestic
food prices of 13 percent during the same period.

5
countries as Gambia and Senegal. The UNDP’s Human Development Index, ranks Tajikistan
closer to such countries as Syria, Vietnam, and Morocco. However, Transparency
International ranks Tajikistan in the bottom seventh of the countries surveyed with respect to
corruption, and the overall rating has changed little over the past five years. Tajikistan ranked
139 (of 183 countries) on the 2011 World Bank Doing Business indicators—gaining
10 places in 2010 due to improvement in ease of starting business and investor protection.
Tajikistan has also gained some ground on EBRD transition indicators. However, much
remains to be done, particularly in competition policy, securities market development,
enterprise restructuring, bank reform, privatization, and infrastructure reform. Tajikistan’s
anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework is
weak. A draft AML/CFT law was presented to parliament in December 2010, based on
technical assistance from the World Bank. However, the 2010 Voluntary Tax Compliance
(VTC) program has the potential to increase the risk of money laundering.
25

4

Tajikistan -- Real per capita GDP and PPP GDP,
1992-2010

3.5

20

Average EBRD Transition Indicators, 2008 and 2010
Maximum=4
2008

3

15

Real GDP per capita
(somoni)

2010

2.5
2

10
1.5
PPP GDP
(US$ bill.)

5

1
0.5

0
1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
Source: WEO

0
Tajikistan

CCA Average

All Transition

B. External Accounts—Temporary Shift to Surplus
4.
The external accounts have strengthened, but the improvement is expected to be
temporary. The external current account shifted to a surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP in 2010,
compared with an average 5 percent deficit during 2005–09. Remittances recovered by
nearly 29 percent, equivalent to a rise of almost 5 percent of GDP. Despite the pick-up in
remittances (which usually entail higher imports) the trade balance improved. The lagged
impact of real exchange rate depreciation, disruptions to rail transit in the first part of 2010,
and a slowdown in external loan disbursements for the public investment program (PIP)
underpinned this shift. The latter two factors are temporary and expected to reverse in 2011.
Adverse terms-of-trade shocks from higher food prices and the full-year impact of Russian
export duties on fuel are likely to be only partially offset by higher cotton prices. On balance,
risks to the external accounts in the near- and medium-term are likely to be on the downside.
5.
The somoni remained steady against the U.S. dollar in nominal terms, but the real
effective exchange rate appreciated by 5.5 percent in the 12 months to December 2010.

6
Analysis suggests the somoni may be modestly overvalued from a medium-term perspective,
highlighting the need for further exchange rate flexibility (see Box 1).
C. Financial Sector—Post-Crisis Problems Remain
6.
Some financial soundness indicators have improved, but frailties in key banks
remain. Private sector credit (excluding activities related to the write-off of loans held by
Kredit Invest as part of the cotton sector debt resolution) recovered through the course of the
year. Financial soundness indicators have also improved but remain a concern. Classified
loans2 have declined, but the extent to which this reflects a lasting improvement is uncertain.3
The two largest banks continue to account for the lion’s share of classified loans. These
banks are most closely associated with agricultural and state-owned enterprises (SOE)
financing, and are also the two banks most often in violation of established prudential
criteria. Profitability turned positive in the fourth quarter, but remains minimal. Recent gains
appear fragile, and linked to restructuring of assets rather than an underlying improvement in
profitability (see Box 2).
D. Policy Stance
7.
The authorities generally maintained fiscal discipline. The overall fiscal deficit
(excluding the externally financed PIP) in 2010 was 0.4 percent of GDP, compared with a
budgeted deficit of 1 percent of GDP. Tax revenues suffered in the first half of the year as
rail blockades impacted VAT on imports, but recovered during the second half of 2010 and
ended the year in line with the indicative target under the ECF-supported program. The
authorities also increased nontax revenues in an effort to keep pace with tax shortfalls in the
first half of the year. Capital spending was higher than expected by about 0.75 percent of
GDP—including domestically financed capital expenditures.4 Current spending, on the other
hand, was about 1 percent of GDP less than expected. This was due in large part to a decision
to limit the increase in civil service wages and salaries to 10 percent rather than the
envisioned 15 percent, and not to fill a number of government posts.
8.
Monetary policy was accommodative for most of 2010, but began responding to
inflation late in the year. Reserve and broad money grew by 15.8 and 26.2 percent,
2

The authorities’ data includes all classified loans—substandard (1–30 days overdue), doubtful (30–60 days),
dangerous (60–180 days), and hopeless (180+ days)—as nonperforming loans.
3

The norm to be applied for upgrading a given loan is uneven. Banks can upgrade a loan and reverse provisions
made earlier, when the “borrower resumes stable repayment of the principal and interest”, without clearly
defining “stable” and the asset classification category to which the loan can be upgraded.
4

About half of budget capital expenditures financed construction on the Roghun hydropower project. Spending
on the Roghun project is also financed by resources raised from the public sale of shares, which amounted to
about SM 830 million by end-2010, and of which some SM 200 million were spent during the year.

7
respectively, in 2010. Higher-than-expected growth in net foreign assets was not fully
compensated by a lower-than-expected increase in net domestic assets (reflecting the small
fiscal deficit and a year-end drive to reduce the outstanding balance of liquidity loans to
commercial banks). Policy rates were increased by 25 bps in October 2010, and by another
75 bps in March 2011. At the same time, however, liquidity support from the NBT to
commercial banks started to rise sharply in the second half of 2010 and into 2011. NBT
liquidity loans rose from SM 78 million at end-June 2010 to SM 265 million (1 percent of
GDP) by September 2010. While this was reduced to SM 186 million by end-year,5 liquidity
loans jumped to over SM 400 million (about 1.3 percent of GDP) in January 2011. Part of
this increase is related to import of food and fuel products for strategic reserves, but was
otherwise mirrored in rising private sector credit, suggesting that some portion of the
liquidity support was on-lent.
Exchange Rate Developments

Credit Growth
(12-month change, in percent)

80

210

2

NEER, 2005=100
REER, 2005=100

Broad Money

60

Somoni/US$ (RHS)

Reserve Money

3

Somoni/30 RuR (RHS)

40

160

20

4

0
Private Credit, excl. KI 1/

110

-20

5

-40
Dec-08

Private Credit, incl . KI 1/
Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

1/ As part of cotton debt resolution, KI loans write-off
began in 2010, affecting in turn credit indicators.

60
Mar-06

160

NBT Liquidity Lending, 201011
(Somoni, thousand)
500,000
450,000

Mar-07

Mar-08

Mar-09

Mar-10

6
Mar-11

Asset Side of Broad Money (y/y, in percent)

110

Liquidity Loans

400,000

Projection

350,000

ECF Indicative Targets

60

300,000

10

250,000
200,000
-40

150,000
100,000

-90
Jan-07

50,000
0
Mar-08

5

Dec-08

Sep-09

Jun-10

Mar-11

Dec-11

Jan-08
Other item s net
Net Credit to Government
Broad Money

Jan-09

Jan-10
Net Foreign Assets
Credit to Private Sector

Jan-11

The composition of liquidity loans changes considerably on a month-to-month basis, but at end-2010 local
currency liquidity loans accounted for 90 percent of the total.

8

Box 1. Tajikistan: Exchange Rate Analysis
Preliminary analysis based on the three CGER methodologies suggests some modest overvaluation of the
somoni, in the range of 3 to 15 percent. The current level of the real effective exchange rate would become
overvalued in light of the anticipated balance of payments pressures that would likely emerge in the wake of
projected adverse external developments (such as the expected sharp decline in cotton prices in 2012 and
increase in international food and fuel prices, based on WEO projections). Staff considers that this
overvaluation is temporary, given the authorities’ commitment to a flexible exchange rate policy, and history of
allowing the somoni to adjust in the face of persistent shocks (such as the substantial depreciation undertaken
during the global economic crisis). Given the heavy concentration of exports in cotton and aluminium, the
impact on competitiveness is seen as negligible.
Tajikistan: Methodologies to Assess Real Exchange Rate Misalignment 1/
Underlying Current
Account Balance 2/

Current Account
Norm

Estimated Over(+)/ Under() Valuation
(in percentage)

-5.3
-5.3
…

-2.2
-2.7
…

15.2
12.6
2.9

Macroeconomic Balance Approach 2/
External Sustainability Approach 2/
Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate Approach 3/
Source: WEO, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Based on CGER methodologies (SM/06/283).

2/ The macroeconomic balance approach and the external sustainability approach define misalignment as the exchange rate
adjustment needed to eliminate the gap between an estimated "current account norm" and the "underlying" current account
balance based on 2016 WEO projections.
3/ This approach defines misalignment as the change in the real exchange rate required to eliminate the gap between actual
REER and the estimated values from the regression of the equilibrium exchange rate based on current fundamentals.

Tajikistan
Change in Reserves

Exchange Market
Pressure Index

2008Q1

2009Q1

2008Q1

2009Q1

2007Q1

2006Q1

2005Q1

2004Q1

2003Q1

Change in Exchange Rate
2002Q1

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5

LICs: Floating Exchange Rate Regimes
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
2007Q1

2006Q1

2005Q1

2004Q1

2003Q1

2002Q1

-2.5

Note. The EMPI combines movements in the exchange rate and international reserves. Negative (positive) values suggest
downward (upward) pressure on the exchange rate, to which countries could respond by either letting the exchange rate
depreciate (appreciate) or by selling (accumulating) reserves . The index is the weighted average of quarterly changes in
foreign reserves and quarterly changes in nominal bilateral exchange rates, using the inverse of their standard deviations
as weights. Changes in foreign reserves are normalized on base money.

Downward pressure
on exchange rate

Upward pressure on
exchange rate

Tajikistan used exchange rate flexibility in responding to the crisis.

9

Box 2. Tajikistan: Financial Sector Developments
The banking system continues to show signs of weakness despite a modest decline in classified assets. This
mainly reflects the exposure of the two largest banks to the cotton and state enterprise sectors. Stress tests point
to a degree of resilience at the system level, but capital positions should be strengthened, risk management and
accounting practices improved, and dependence on liquidity support from the NBT eliminated.
From a systemic perspective, bank profitability is low, and classified loans remain a concern. After turning
negative in mid-2010, commercial banks’ returns on equity and assets improved modestly—registering 0.8 and
3.8 percent, respectively, in the fourth quarter. Total system capital has followed a similar pattern, contracting
during the third quarter and recording a slight recovery late in the year. Both capital and profitability have
benefitted from a reduction in classified assets and the associated decline in provisioning. Classified loans
declined to 17.2 percent of total loans by the end of 2010 from a peak of 28 percent in the first quarter.
However, almost all of this improvement reflects recent restructuring efforts at a few banks, including a
reclassification of the terms related to a sizeable directed loan portfolio held by Agroinvest Bank (AIB).

60
50

35

Asset Quality
Classified Loans

70

Classified loans net of provisions to reg. capital 1/

Return on assets
Return on equity

25

Classified loans to gross loans 1/

20

Classified lonas to gross loans 2/

40

15

30

10

20

5

10

0

0
Dec-06

Profitability
(In percent)

30

-5

Dec-07

Dec-08

1/ Includes loans 1 and more days overdue.
2/ Includes loans 30 and more days overdue.

Dec-09

Dec-10

-10
-15
Jun-06

Dec-07

Jun-09

Dec-10

The weakness in the system’s financial soundness measures is attributable largely to the deterioration of
the balance sheets of the two largest banks. Orien Bank (OB) and AIB account for nearly 60 percent of
system assets and hold the majority of classified loans, which dropped from 67 percent of total loans in
September to 60 percent by end-2010. Despite this improvement, these banks’ exposure to problematic sectors
is significant and poses ongoing challenges to their capital positions. The recent write-back of provisioning has
improved CARs for OB (adjusted for government cotton debt) and AIB to 20 percent each (from 19.3 and
13 percent previously), but this may only prove temporary given their loan concentration.
Banks have been increasingly dependent on NBT liquidity loans to meet their funding needs. This
mitigates banks’ incentives to enhance capital buffers, implement stricter risk management and accounting
practices, and engage in interbank markets. Outstanding liquidity loans at end-January 2011 amounted to over
SM 465 million, with OB and AIB accounting for the majority. While the banking system’s liquid assets remain
below pre-crisis levels, current borrowing appears inconsistent with historical liquidity needs, and reinforces
balance sheet risks to both banks and the NBT.
The financial system remains vulnerable to future shocks. Stress tests indicate that credit risks to capital
adequacy are non-negligible, particularly when large exposure loans migrate into doubtful categories. Under
such assumptions, the system’s CAR declines by 8.5 percent to 15 percent, while an increase in the deposit rate
of 4 percent translates into a decline of 8 percent in the CAR. Liquidity risks do not appear to be significant, but
a depreciation of the exchange rate would negatively affect system capital given heavy financial dollarization.
The NBT should undertake urgent steps to strengthen the financial sector and reduce its dependence on
liquidity support. In particular, system capital requirements should be raised, collateral strictly enforced,
governance frameworks enhanced, and the terms of liquidity support brought in line with market trends. In
addition, T-bills issued to banks as part of the cotton debt resolution should be reissued on market terms.

10
II. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK
9.
The nascent recovery provides grounds for optimism, but significant challenges
remain in the post-crisis environment. The economy remains relatively undiversified and
dependent on external financial flows—especially remittances. High pre-crisis growth rates
were enabled by large-scale emigration and an associated sixteen-fold increase in remittances
as a share of GDP during 2001–08, which in turn fueled an increase in trade and services
activity, as well as higher levels of construction. Significant investment in agriculture
(including cotton) also contributed to high levels of economic growth, and may do so in the
future, depending on continued progress in land reform and establishing sustainable
mechanisms for agricultural financing.
10.
On balance, future growth may be lower than during the boom years, but more
sustainable, and will depend on a mix of policies to address existing vulnerabilities, ensure
macroeconomic stability, and boost market orientation. The authorities’ medium-term
strategy is embodied in the National Development Strategy and the Poverty Reduction
strategy (PRS) for 2010–12. The economic development pillar of the PRS (which
complements the strategy for health, education, and food security) emphasizes
(i) development of Tajikistan’s comparative advantage in hydroelectricity production;
(ii) agricultural diversification; and (iii) creating a more conducive environment for private
sector activity and investment—including reforms in land and property rights, state enterprise
management, removing regulatory barriers to trade and investment, and boosting financial
intermediation and access to credit. Consistent with these objectives, public investment is
expected to remain strong (albeit declining from recent peaks in line with a relatively
conservative projection for external financing over the medium term as spending on Roghun
tapers off) and private investment is projected to rise steadily.
11.
Tajikistan remains at a high level of debt distress under the joint Bank-Fund
Debt Sustainability Framework (see Appendix). While the level of external debt is not high
by international comparison and domestic debt remains small, Tajikistan’s low level of
institutional capacity and vulnerability to external shocks translates into a larger potential for
debt distress. However, notably, the projected prolonged breaches of debt sustainability
thresholds under the baseline scenario and under stress tests do not incorporate remittances in
the debt sustainability assessment. If remittances (currently in excess of 30 percent of GDP)
were included in the analysis, Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress would likely be lower.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
12.
Against this backdrop, the policy discussions focused on (i) the recent rise in inflation
and the government’s policy response; (ii) addressing vulnerabilities in the financial sector;
and (iii) shifting to a post-crisis fiscal stance, while ensuring sufficient space for critical
social and infrastructure spending.

11
A. Coping with Price Shocks
13.
Rising inflation is likely to be a central policy challenge in the near and medium
term, particularly if the shock to food and fuel prices is sustained. Food imports make up
about 20 percent of Tajikistan’s total import bill (about 8 percent of GDP), and food and fuel
together make up just over 60 percent of the CPI basket. The bulk of Tajikistan’s wheat and
flour come from Kazakhstan, but prices are sensitive to international commodity market
fluctuations, and the price increase following Russia’s export ban have been clearly visible in
the food component of Tajikistan’s CPI.
14.
The government’s response to recent price shocks has been mainly through
administrative measures. In late 2010 and early 2011, the government imported and sold
food products from strategic reserves in an effort to ensure adequate supply to the market and
curb any speculative pressures. Government agencies (such as the Antimonopoly Agency)
have been charged with monitoring prices in an attempt to curb any “artificial” rise in the
prices of essential goods. The government has also sought relief from the recent increase in
fuel export duties imposed by Russia, and is considering measures to foster agricultural
diversification and ensure a robust supply response to the shift in relative prices.6 The
decision to restrict the increase in public sector wages and salaries, while motivated primarily
by budget concerns, is also likely to have mitigated the risk of second round inflation effects.
15.
Monetary policy in this context will need to find a balance between supporting
the recovery and minimizing second round effects of the food and fuel price increases.
While core inflation has been subdued, headline inflation increased to 12 percent in February
2011, adding to the risks posed by the pickup in money growth. The recent 75 basis point
increase in the policy rate to 9 percent is welcome, but in the absence of an active interbank
market the interest rate channel of monetary policy remains relatively weak. More stringent
terms on liquidity loans7 should provide greater traction for containing reserve money growth
to levels consistent with the objective of mitigating upward pressure on core inflation. In
particular, increasing the interest rate for liquidity lending to prevailing market levels and
restricting the use of this facility to emergency purposes should help to reduce banks’
dependence on the NBT, and contain reserve money.
16.
Over the medium term, a framework for direct support to the poor in the event
of shocks is needed. Cash transfer mechanisms now in place apply only to (i) selected
6

The World Bank is assisting Tajikistan with additional financing for the emergency food security response
project to increase domestic food production and improve the ability of poor households to deal with seed
shortages because of poor crops. This includes a new temporary revolving fund for fertilizer imports to help
private commercial farmers cope with the collapse of the existing fertilizer supply chain.
7

The interest rate on liquidity loans was raised at end-March 2011 from about 9 percent to 21 percent and 22
percent for foreign exchange and somoni-based loans, respectively, consistent with prevailing lending rates.

12
consumers of electricity and gas; and (ii) low income households to encourage school
enrollment. The amounts involved in these two schemes are small, and neither has the
potential for rapid scaling-up. The World Bank is engaged in preparing a project to help
develop a more effective system of social assistance. A pilot of consolidated social assistance
is underway in two local districts to test a proxy-means-based methodology to identify
beneficiaries. However, given the time necessary to establish a database of beneficiaries and
set up the infrastructure for transfers, it will likely be two-three years before a system is in
place.
B. Financial Sector—Vulnerabilities and Policies
17.
Directed lending, regulatory forbearance, and exposure to weak or volatile
sectors have left a legacy of low banking sector profitability and a large stock of
classified loans. The small size of the financial sector and limited financial intermediation
suggest the systemic risk of a bank failure to economic activity is relatively low. The narrow
composition of deposits also suggests that bank runs in the classic sense are unlikely, and that
the impact of a bank failure would not fall primarily on the poor.8 However, standardized
stress tests also indicate vulnerability of capital adequacy to a range of shocks. Given the
limited capacity of the deposit insurance scheme, and the net-negative position of the NBT,
absorbing potential financial system losses could fall to the budget. Further, low levels of
financial intermediation are a drag on prospects for future economic growth.
Tajikistan: Cross Country Comparison of Financial Intermediation
Broad Money

Credit to the
Private Sector

Deposits

Banking
Assets*

(in percent of GDP)
Tajikistan

18

15

12

24

Armenia
Azerbaijan
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Uzbekistan

27
24
30
45
31
20

26
18
33
46
13
17

17
12
24
39
13
16

48
44
57
81
31
52

27.9

24.0

19.0

48.1

Average

*Sum of net foreign assets of banks, credit to the government by banks, credit to the private sector, and
other items net.
Sources: IFS, WEO, Country desks, and authorities.

8

A substantial portion of bank deposits come from state or quasi-state enterprises. Remaining private deposits
are relatively few in number.

13
18.
The authorities recognize the need for financial sector reform. They pointed out
that financial sector indicators had improved steadily over the year, and that (due largely to
high prices and investor interest) no additional bank financing for the cotton sector was
needed for 2010. They agreed on the need for a reform strategy that would address, in
sequence: (i) regulation; (ii) accounting; (iii) revaluation of asset positions; and (iv) on the
basis of the preceding steps, a reassessment of banks’ position relative to prudential criteria,
including capital adequacy. Work in this area has already begun, based on a vulnerability
assessment conducted by the World Bank, and will be further facilitated by donor-funded
strategic advisors. In line with a structural benchmark for end-March 2011, banks not in
compliance with established prudential criteria have also submitted time-bound actions plans
to become fully compliant with these standards. A role for Fund technical assistance may be
needed as the work progresses. A sustainable mechanism for agricultural financing will also
be needed to ensure that the banking system and the state budget are protected going forward
(see Box 6).
C. Maintaining Fiscal and Debt Sustainability
19.
Counter-cyclical fiscal policies in 2009–10 allowed for tax cuts, additional
expenditures, and an expansion of the fiscal deficit beyond historical norms. The overall
deficit, including the foreign-financed PIP, averaged nearly 5 percent per year during
2008–10, putting external debt on a rising trend. While the narrower deficit, excluding the
foreign financed PIP, has not been large by international comparison, it poses a potential risk
going forward given (i) the lack of international market access and the near absence of a
domestic debt market; (ii) a limited cushion of government deposits at the NBT; and (iii) an
increase in recurrent expenditures (partly associated with social spending), without similar
gains in tax revenue (see Boxes 3 and 4). In addition, high external debt (and a high risk of
debt distress under the DSA framework), as well as potential contingent liabilities in state
enterprises (see Box 5) and the financial sector9 suggest the need for careful fiscal
management, rebuilding buffers, and leaving room for maneuver in the event of negative
shocks. Particular emphasis is needed on improving the efficiency of tax collection and a
review of tax policy.
20.
Fiscal consolidation will therefore be needed over the medium term. The fiscal
stance envisioned for 2011 (a deficit of 1 percent of GDP) seeks to balance support for
9

A proper evaluation of potential fiscal liabilities from the financial sector must rest first upon a rigorous and
uniform accounting of problem assets and provisioning—key elements of the financial sector reform plan slated
for June 2011 (benchmark under the ECF). Depending on a range of factors and the nature of remedial actions,
the fiscal cost of bank restructuring could be minimal. However, to give a sense of potential magnitude, the
deficiency in regulatory capital from a combined shock under standard stress tests amounts to about 0.5 percent
of GDP, whereas a blanket guarantee on deposits of the two largest banks would be in the range of 5 percent of
GDP.

14
anti-inflationary monetary policies and addressing social pressures, including from higher
food prices. Looking ahead, however, some consolidation (at least to a balanced budget,
excluding the PIP) will be needed to meet both external and internal resource constraints. In
the absence of additional budget support from donors, continuing deficits of up to 1 percent
of GDP , as implied under the government’s medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF)
may not be feasible given a declining buffer of government deposits in the banking system
and a very shallow domestic debt market (see Boxes 3 and 4). At the same time, incurring
additional external debt to finance government spending (even if available) would add further
pressure to debt dynamics. Tajikistan can ill afford such debt given its already high risk of
debt distress.
21.
The authorities accepted the need for prudent fiscal management, as well as the
need to rebuild some fiscal buffers. But they also highlighted pressing social expenditure
needs (a point also emphasized by donors), and the comparatively low level of spending in
this area compared with other countries in the region. They also emphasized investment
spending on Tajikistan’s relatively underdeveloped physical infrastructure (particularly
hydroelectricity, which is a key element under the poverty reduction strategy) as central to
ensuring levels of economic growth sufficient to address poverty and unemployment.10 Staff
highlighted the need to raise tax revenue to its full potential and the desirability of additional
grant financing to create room for higher spending in these priority areas.

10

Tajikistan’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) identifies energy development as a key priority for social and
economic development. The authorities expect that harnessing Tajikistan’s hydropower potential will provide
uninterrupted supply of electricity, provide foreign exchange, and encourage investment in energy-intensive
industries. The Joint Staff Assessment Note (JSAN), highlighted the need for realistic priorities across different
objectives and to identify additional financing sources for the ambitious program. At that time, the PRS had a
cumulative financing gap of US$8 billion—likely to increase further once the Roghun project is fully costed.

15

Box 3. Tajikistan: Medium-Term Fiscal Sustainability
With the economy now recovering, Tajikistan needs to moderate or eliminate budget deficits to maintain
fiscal sustainability and rebuild buffers. A countercyclical fiscal response to the global crisis starting in
2009 led to budget deficits and a drawdown of government deposits accumulated in previous surplus years.
Particularly in light of expected increases in external debt service, fiscal consolidation will be required to
maintain debt sustainability going forward.
The government’s Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for 2011–13 has yet to reflect
constraints imposed by the need to maintain fiscal sustainability. A sustainable fiscal framework for
Tajikistan needs to satisfy two constraints—the first imposed by external debt sustainability (see DSA), and the
second by a realistic ceiling on domestic financing. Under staff’s conservative revenue and grant projections,
the authorities’ MTEF-based expenditure levels could result in fiscal gaps (as much as 1 percent of GDP by
2013), which would be difficult to fill from domestic sources given (i) limited appetite for domestic debt; and
(ii) the likely depletion of government deposits in the banking system by 2013. External financing to fill these
gaps, even if available, would bring public debt above the targeted ceiling of 40 percent of GDP, and extend
significantly the breach of debt sustainability thresholds over the long term in the event of most adverse shocks.
Potential Fiscal Gap Under Authorities’ MTEF
Financing Requirement
(In percent of GDP)

3.5

Sources of Financing
(In percent of GDP)

3.5

2.5

2.5

22.0

1.5

1.5

21.0

0.5

20.0

0.5

Amortization of External Debt

Potential Fiscal Gap

19.0

Budget Support

Fiscal Balance (excl. PIPs)
-1.5

Expenditure
Total Revenue and
Grants, excl. PIP

-0.5

-0.5

Potential Fiscal Gap Under MTEF
(In percent of GDP)

23.0

Operations with Assets
-1.5

Domestic Financing Feasible

18.0

Total Financing Requirement
-2.5

-2.5

2007

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2009

2011

2013

2015

17.0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Revenue and expenditure measures together with financial market development will be needed for
medium-term sustainability. On the revenue side the staff’s adjustment scenario targets an increase in the
efficiency of tax collection, a decrease in tax exemptions, and an overhaul of tax policy (with IMF technical
assistance)—leading conservatively to a revenue increase of perhaps 0.5 to 1 percentage point of GDP over the
medium term. Remaining adjustment should come from expenditure compression after taking into account the
potential for increases in domestic financing. Staff estimates the capacity of the banking system to absorb new
government debt to be in the range of 0.5–0.8 percent of GDP per year in 2011–16. Allowing for substantial
investment spending, a sustainable fiscal path would imply on average a balanced budget in the medium term.
Notably, the proposed fiscal path (while sustainable in a normative scenario) leaves little room for dealing
either with new external shocks or quasi-fiscal risks from the state enterprise and financial sectors. A more
aggressive path for revenue improvement, a less ambitious (but hopefully well targeted) path for investment
spending, or additional grant resources from donors would be necessary to establish a cushion for such shocks.
In this context, the path proposed above is a minimal adjustment, and a more aggressive approach consistent
with rebuilding fiscal buffers would entail a return to small fiscal surpluses over the medium term.

16

Box 4. Tajikistan: Financial Market Developments
Financial markets in Tajikistan are embryonic. Liquidity in all markets (money, bond, stock, and foreign
exchange) is low, secondary markets have yet to emerge, and interbank lending is minimal. To deepen financial
markets, the issuance of T-bills should be properly integrated in the process of public debt management. To
help create an active interbank market, the structural weaknesses in commercial banks should be addressed and
the NBT should only lend to banks for emergency liquidity reasons.
The money market is the only active securities market in Tajikistan. NBT Depository Certificates (CDs)
and government T-bills are the only instruments. CDs are issued twice a week—with 14 and 28 day
maturities—and monthly with a 56 day maturity. Total issuance is usually small—about SM 153 million
(0.6 percent of GDP) and mainly for monetary management. With IMF technical assistance, T-bill auctions
were started in 2009. Some SM 53 million were issued in 2010—all with a maturity of 91 days and an average
interest rate of 7 percent. The auction process is improving, and bid-to-cover ratios have risen steadily.
However, the issuance of T-bills has yet to be integrated with budget financing needs. The Ministry of Finance
also issued bonds to commercial banks as part of the cotton debt resolution, but on nonmarket terms (8 year
maturity and 2 percent interest). The legal framework for a stock market exists and the stock exchange resides
theoretically in the NBT, but no active trading takes place.
18.0
16.0
14.0

Auction Results of NBT CDs

10.0

Amount Sold (in million SM)
Bid-Of f er Ratio
Average Interest Rate (in percent)

9.0
8.0

Auction Results Treasury Bills
Amount Sold (in millions)
Bid-Offer Ratio
Average Interest Rate (in percent)

7.0

12.0

6.0

10.0

5.0

8.0

4.0

6.0

3.0

4.0

2.0

2.0
3-Jan-08
Source: NBT

1.0

3-Jan-09

3-Jan-10

3-Jan-11

0.0
22-Dec-09

22-Mar-10

22-Jun-10

22-Sep-10

Source: NBT

Trading in currency markets takes place mainly in U.S. dollar, Russian Ruble, and Euro. The NBT
provides foreign exchange to the commercial banks through spot trading and liquidity loans in dollars and
Rubles upon availability. Currencies are also traded in the interbank market and by foreign exchange traders on
the street market. The highest volume of trade occurs in U.S. dollars ($6.8 million in 2010) as the economy
remains highly dollarized. Second comes the Russian Ruble, reflecting the main source of remittances. The
NBT restricts banks’ open currency positions to a small proportion of their capital such that larger transactions
often cannot be accommodated by market participants.
The efficiency of financial markets in Tajikistan could be improved by several measures. A proper
integration of T-bill auctions in the process of public debt management and budget financing would increase the
reliability of the auctions, their liquidity, and size. To avoid fragmenting the market, higher demand would be
an important precondition for lengthening maturities and development of a proper yield curve. A liquid primary
T-bill market could be a catalyst for secondary market trading and, when used as collateral, for a more active
interbank market. The interbank market has also been constrained by a lack of confidence in the repayment
capabilities of counterparties. A stronger, more effective supervisory role by the NBT and actions to address
underlying vulnerabilities in commercial banks is needed to address this constraint. Additionally, the banking
system needs to be weaned from the ample and relatively inexpensive liquidity available through the NBT.
Beyond the increase in liquidity loan rates, future measures could potentially include introduction of a standing
overnight facility for emergency liquidity.

17
IV. PROGRAM REVIEW AND POLICIES FOR 2011
22.
Performance under the program has generally been good. All but one of the
quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2010 were met. The exception was with
respect to the continuous criterion on accumulation of new external payment arrears.
23.
In the context of the discussions on the fourth review, staff received data
indicating that arrears were accumulated in 2010 on two external loans with government
guarantees.


In the first case, external payment arrears accumulated on two scheduled
payments from a Tajik textile company to a German bank of Euro 86,685 and
Euro 83,272 in January and July 2010, respectively, and reached a maximum of Euro
103,032 (equivalent to US$148,428 at program exchange rates) during the course of
the year. All payment arrears were cleared by end-August 2010, and penalty interest
was cleared by end-December 2010.



In the second case, the City of Dushanbe entered into a loan agreement in July
2008 with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD),
guaranteed by the central government. On October 26, 2010, the EBRD presented the
City of Dushanbe with the Billing Advice for US$43,426 which consisted of
US$216 in loan interest and US$43,210 in a commitment charge, payable on
November 15, 2010. The authorities have indicated that the City of Dushanbe paid
the amount of $43,426 on January 17, 2011—two months after the date due.

24.
Following interdepartmental consultations, staff has concluded that the arrears
are so small as to be trivial, with no material impact on debt sustainability. As such,
staff supports the granting of a waiver for the nonobservance of the continuous performance
criterion on non-accumulation of external payments arrears. Importantly, the discovery of the
arrears has prompted a range of remedial actions by the authorities. To prevent recurrence of
new arrears on the textile company loan, the Ministry of Finance is drafting a supplementary
guarantee agreement introducing a penalty interest that would be paid to the government if
the loan falls in arrears. The government has also requested a Debt Management Performance
Assessment (DEMPA) from the World Bank, and has reaffirmed that issuance of such
guarantees will continue to be restricted.1112

11

Government guarantees on external loans are limited, and in recent years have been extended only to loans
from the EBRD. At end-2010, there were only nine such guarantees in place covering seven EBRD loans, one
bilateral loan from Russia, and the loan to the textile company (together covering some US$23.4 million).
Except for the textile company loan, the borrowers are all public entities. And the textile company was a public
enterprise when the loan was made in 1997.

18
25.

Two of the indicative targets (IT) under the program were also missed:


Social spending. The authorities maintain that budgetary targets on health and
education spending were met. With respect to the IT under the program, however,
spending was less than targeted due to a decision to limit the increase in public sector
wages and salaries, and a decision not to fill a number of vacancies. The mission
emphasized the importance of meeting social spending targets—particularly given the
relatively low (on a cross country basis) level of spending in this area, and noted that
there was sufficient room under the program to meet the target but that priority had
been given to capital spending.



NBT liquidity lending. While a significant portion of new liquidity lending was
related to the import of strategic food and fuel products, the rapid increase and impact
on reserve money posed the risk of additional pressures on inflation, the exchange
rate, and the NBT balance sheet.13 To address these risks, staff and the authorities
reached understandings on the following steps: (i) resetting the indicative targets for
2011 in line with the revised macroeconomic framework and with a view to
substantially reducing NBT liquidity loans; (ii) restructuring the IT for liquidity
support from an end-quarter basis to a three-month average to address the issue of
intra-test date volatility; and (iii) changing the terms of these loans to reduce their
attractiveness and better assure that they are used for short-term liquidity
management.

26.
Changes to the macroeconomic framework require one proposed revision to the
performance criterion for net domestic assets for end-June 2011 and end-December
2011. The monetary framework was adjusted to accommodate a higher level of real GDP
growth and inflation in 2010 and 2011. In this context, the authorities are requesting an
upward revision to the target for net domestic assets for end-June 2011 and end-December
2011. Even with this upward revision, monetary policy remains moderately restrictive and
consistent with the objective of mitigating second-round effects from the ongoing food and
fuel shock.

12

Recognizing that capacity constraints have also contributed to the occurrence of misreporting, the staff
proposes to amend the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) to add a grace period of 30 days to the
definition of external payments arrears.

13

The NBT continues to be in a net negative capital position. A recapitalization strategy (formulated with IMF
TA) has suffered delays, but progress is being made. In August 2010, a presidential order was issued requiring
cotton investors to repay their obligations. The government also agreed, as part of the 2011 budget, to inject SM
200 million into the NBT. The NBT also converted an outstanding Ministry of Finance deposit from the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative to equity, and has reinstated two thirds of the Kredit Invest cotton producer
loans (written off in 2009). As a result, NBT’s level of negative equity fell from about SM 2.6 billion at
end-2009 to SM 1.9 billion by end-2010.

19
27.
Structural measures for the fourth review were met with slight delays. Audited
NBT financial statements through December 2009 were published on the NBT’s website in
September 2010, as envisioned. A revised NBT law and draft bankruptcy law for credit
institutions were submitted to parliament in the first week of January 2011 (just after the
end-December 2010 deadline). Importantly, the Roghun OJSC has continued to publish on
the Ministry of Finance website quarterly reports on sources and uses of funds, along with
other operational data. Plans are also proceeding for a general shareholders’ meeting in the
first half of 2011 (a commitment under the MEFP).
28.
The attached LOI and TMU update the government’s policies and commitments
for 2011. The authorities have encountered technical difficulties in meeting one benchmark
(publication of an audit of Roghun OJSC, slated for end-February 2011), and are requesting
to have this shifted to end-June 2011.14 Staff and the authorities came to an understanding on
publication of audited financial statements for Talco Management by end-June 2011, which
is significant step forward in transparency. Understandings were also reached on a structural
benchmark for NBT Board approval by end-June 2011 of a reform strategy to maintain
financial sector stability. This should serve as an anchor for addressing vulnerabilities and
transparency issues in the financial sector as well as a framework for structuring technical
assistance from the IMF and other sources. In the revised TMU, a new program exchange
rate (based on the end-2010 rate) is being proposed, as well as a new definition for the
indicative target on NBT liquidity loans, and (recognizing capacity constraints) a grace
period in the definition of external payments arrears.
29.
Risks to the program stem from the potential for new exogenous shocks and
from the many challenges involved in the transition to a more market based economy.
As a landlocked economy with a heavy dependence on food and fuel imports, a reliance on
inward remittances, and a relatively narrow export base, Tajikistan’s external position and
growth prospects are vulnerable to shocks from different directions. Vulnerabilities in the
financial and state enterprise sectors also remain, and could represent a quasi-fiscal liability
should efforts to reform these institutions be delayed or watered-down. Critical in this regard
will be the commitment from the government to refrain from directed lending and to make
room for supervisory authorities to take corrective actions, when necessary.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
30.
The economic recovery in Tajikistan is taking hold, and the medium-term
outlook has promise, but challenges remain. Facilitated by a regional economic rebound,
rising aluminum prices, agricultural diversification, favorable climatic conditions, and
counter-cyclical fiscal policies, economic growth is rising. A return to the pre-crisis boom
14

An audit firm has been selected, but before review of the financial statements can take place, an audit of work
in progress (fixed assets) needs to be conducted. This process is expected to take several months.

20
years is unlikely, but there is room for optimism that Tajikistan can generate sufficient rates
of economic growth to make progress in reducing widespread poverty and unemployment.
Careful macroeconomic management, rebuilding fiscal buffers, a comprehensive effort to
address financial sector vulnerabilities, and a commitment to market-oriented reforms,
including in the areas of governance and transparency, will be key.
31.
The shift to a post-crisis environment suggests the need for a fresh look at
medium-term fiscal objectives. The government’s medium-term fiscal policy is
appropriately anchored in the National Development Strategy and the Poverty Reduction
Strategy, and the fiscal framework for 2011 remains broadly appropriate. However, as the
crisis recedes, consolidation will be needed to ensure medium-term fiscal and debt
sustainability. Particularly in light of expected increases in external debt service, a steady
reduction of deficits will be required to maintain debt sustainability going forward. The staff
recommends a combination of (i) continued progress on improving tax administration; (ii) a
review of tax policy with a view to simplifying the tax regime, expanding the tax base, and
facilitating an increase in tax revenue; (iii) continued development of the domestic debt
market; and (iv) maintaining a careful balance between current and capital expenditures in
order to simultaneously meet resource constraints while meeting social and developmental
objectives outlined in the poverty reduction strategy.
32.
The staff recognizes the potential impact of recent inflation on the poor. It
supports the authorities’ proactive approach in trying to mitigate this impact, but emphasized
the need to ensure transparency and avoid long-term fiscal costs. In the absence of adequate
social safety nets, the authorities had little alternative but to resort to temporary
administrative measures. Staff considers, however, that further operations to procure food
and fuel for strategic reserves should be carried out as a fiscal operation rather than through
the banking system, and that blanket subsidies should be avoided. Looking ahead, a more
effective means of providing direct and targeted assistance to the poor is needed and the
authorities are encouraged to cooperate closely with the World Bank to develop such a
system.
33.
Monetary policy needs to focus on containing inflation. Liquidity lending has
surged to levels beyond what would be expected for banks’ emergency liquidity needs. The
associated excessive growth in reserve money could potentially put upward pressure on core
inflation and downward pressure on the somoni if maintained over the course of the year.
Substantial short-term depreciation pressures would be a particular concern for financial
sector stability, given the high degree of dollarization. The risk of nonrepayment to the NBT
is also non-negligible. Staff urges a reduction of liquidity lending in line with a path for net
domestic assets and reserve money consistent with macroeconomic stability.
34.
Exchange rate policy needs to take into account the potential for fundamental
shifts in the terms of trade. The continued rise in food and fuel prices, coupled with a sharp
projected downturn in cotton prices suggest the somoni may be overvalued on a

21
medium-term perspective. As such, staff urges the authorities to take a flexible approach to
exchange rate management. While intervention may be necessary to smooth excess volatility,
the NBT should not resist fundamental shifts in the supply and demand for foreign exchange,
but allow the somoni to move in line with these forces to facilitate external adjustment and
protect the limited stock of foreign exchange reserves.
35.
A comprehensive and well-sequenced effort is needed to address financial sector
vulnerabilities. Failure to address structural weaknesses in the financial system could evolve
into fiscal liabilities, particularly in the event of external shocks. Key actions should include:
(i) an end to directed lending; (ii) a uniform classification of NPLs, together with tighter
standards on reclassification; (iii) a requirement for banks to fully provision for the
uncollateralized portion of NPLs; and (iv) a reevaluation of banks’ capital adequacy and a
requirement for capital infusions to ensure banks meet minimum capital adequacy
requirements. From the government side, a reissuance of government bonds placed with the
banks to compensate for cotton loans at market rates would be an important near-term step to
improving banks’ balance sheets and easing liquidity constraints.
36.
A self-sustaining mechanism for agricultural financing should be a central
objective. Considerable progress has been made in this area in recent years through the
freedom to farm act, and the establishment of such initiatives as the Tajikistan Agricultural
Financing Framework. It is critical that this work continue to prevent future recourse to the
NBT or directed lending by the banking system to meet agricultural financing needs once the
current boom in commodity prices ends. Should such a financing gap appear in the future,
direct fiscal support (subject to the competing pressures on the budget and the transparency
that accompanies such spending) would be a preferable course of action.
37.
Structural reforms should continue to target governance and transparency, but
also seek to facilitate market orientation. The progress made under the program with
respect to transparency of state enterprises and government operations is laudable. The
continued efforts to monitor the operations of SOEs through the Ministry of Finance are
welcome, as is publication of financial information by Roghun OJSC. Looking ahead, staff
emphasizes the potential benefits of an overhaul of the tax regime—both from the point of
view of boosting revenue, but also to create a more open business environment. The latter
will be particularly important for boosting economic prospects and job creation. On data
provision and transparency, the staff welcomes the efforts to produce macroeconomic and
financial data more regularly, and to publish these data on government agency websites.
However, staff encourages the authorities to enhance Tajikistan’s AML/CFT framework,
notably by implementing the recommendations made during the Eurasian group 2008 mutual
evaluation.
38.
Policies under the program remain broadly on track. All quantitative performance
criteria for end-2010 were met, with the exception of the continuous performance criterion on
non-accumulation of external payments arrears. The accumulation of external arrears was

22
unfortunate, but (i) was so small as to be trivial, with no material impact on program
performance; (ii) resolved in a short period; and (iii) accompanied by credible corrective
actions. In this regard, staff supports the authorities’ request for a waiver for nonobservance
of the continuous performance criterion on the non-accumulation of external payments
arrears.
39.
The two missed program indicative targets are a concern. The lower-thanprojected level of social spending relative to the program indicative target is regrettable,
particularly given that there was over-performance with respect to the budget deficit target.
Staff urges the authorities to maintain the emphasis on badly needed social spending,
particularly in light of the potential impact of recent inflation on the poor. With respect to the
missed indicative target on liquidity lending by the NBT, staff urges the authorities to
observe the revised path for the remainder of the year, so as to alleviate potential upward
pressure on prices and downward pressure on the somoni, and to protect the NBT balance
sheet.
40.
As overall performance under the program has been good, staff supports the
authorities’ request for completion of the fourth review under the ECF arrangement and the
fifth disbursement. In this context, it also supports the authorities’ request for modification of
end-June 2011 and end-December 2011 performance criterion on net domestic assets; the
modification of the definition of the indicative target on NBT liquidity loans; the use of a
new program exchange rate; and introduction of a grace period in the definition of external
payments arrears..
41.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held in accordance with
Decision No. 14747–(10/96), adopted on September 28, 2010 on consultation cycles.

23

Box 5. Tajikistan: State Enterprise Sector and the Problem of Arrears
Arrears are a pervasive problem in Tajikistan. Key areas of the economy remain dominated by SOEs
operating under soft budget constraints. Inter-enterprise and tax arrears are widespread, affecting profitability
and engendering weak fiscal discipline. As of October 2010, the largest SOEs had SM 2.6 billion on accounts
payable and SM 1.7 on accounts receivable, up from SM 2.2 billion and SM 1.6 billion in 2009, respectively.
SOEs with the biggest overdue payables are Tajik Aluminum Company (Talco), Tajiktransgaz (gas supplier),
Barki Tajik (the electricity company), and Tajik Rail. Tax arrears by state firms have also increased, amounting
to almost 700 million or about 3 percent of GDP in 2010.

Tax Arrears

800

In millions of somoni; lhs
700

(As of October 1, 2010)

In percent of GDP; rhs

3.5

3.0

600
2.5
500

Large SOEs: Arrears on Accounts Payable
SM 2.6 billion
Tajiktelekom

Other

(As of October 1, 2010)

Tajik Air
Tajikistan
Railway

2.0
400

Talco
1.5

300
1.0

Barki Tajik

200

0.5

100

0

0.0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Tajiktransgaz

Large SOEs are responsible for almost half of tax arrears. Barki Tajik is the largest source, holding about
43 percent of all tax arrears, and reflecting in part inter-enterprise and other arrears on electricity services.
These arrears persist despite periodic settlements with the government (the latest settlement in 2009 resulted in
a decline of its tax obligations by roughly a quarter, or SM100 million). Barki Tajik also owes SM 627 million
on accounts payables (claims on Barki Tajik, excluding tax arrears), and has large amounts on overdue accounts
receivable (unpaid electrical bills and other claims on individuals and entities). Inability by the energy
monopoly to collect payments for their services effectively and widespread government interventions seriously
undermine its long-term financial viability.
Tolerance of arrears by the government and inability to enforce legal actions against noncompliant
agents aggravate the problem. Government nonpayments, or delayed payments, create an incentive for other
economic agents to follow suit. For example, arrears outside the budget are tolerated to compensate for
budgetary arrears (like wages and salaries). At the same time, the government’s ability to monitor arrears, and
thus, prevent them is limited by the absence of a formal system to monitor arrears. An additional contributing
factor is ineffective bankruptcy and judicial procedures, which make it difficult to enforce legal actions against
noncompliant agents.
Resolution of the arrears problem will require wide-ranging actions to improve financial discipline.
These include restructuring of SOEs to put them on the path of financial viability and subjecting them to hard
budget constraints. To that end, the government has approved restructuring of Barki Tajik which will be
undertaken with donor assistance in stages through 2015, and which among other things, involves breaking
down the company into three entities with separation of power generation, transmission, and distribution. The
SOE monitoring unit housed in the Ministry of Finance continues to build capacity in its role overseeing the
operations of key SOEs and ensuring transparency. Completion of a fiscal risk assessment as part of the
2012 budget (a benchmark under the ECF arrangement) will also be a key step in transparency and sound public
financial management. Supporting reform of the legislative and court system will also be required to more
effectively regulate inter-enterprise financial relationships and boost enforcement of collection efforts.

24
Box 6. Tajikistan: Financing the Agricultural Sector
Agricultural financing—particularly for cotton—has been a difficult issue in Tajikistan. While current
high prices for cotton have led to sufficient financing from private investors, past years have required NBT
and commercial bank involvement—contributing to the NBT’s net negative capital position, and the rise in
banks’ classified or nonperforming assets. Looking forward, it is crucial to develop a sound market-based
system, which grants farmers access to credit while at the same time protecting financial system stability.
While it accounts for a relatively small share of output, cotton production has dominated agricultural
policy and credit resources. This concentration reflects an emphasis on cotton as an export good. Recent
reforms such as the “Freedom to Farm Act” are leading to crop rotation and diversification into such value
added products as fruit and vegetables. But cotton will likely continue to play a major role as its production is
water and labor intensive (Tajikistan has generally been water abundant, and around 75 percent of the
population is living in rural areas), related infrastructure is already in place, and perishability is low.

Percentage Share of Sectors in Total Loans of
Credit Institutions: 200810
Agriculture

Industry

Consum ption

Trade

60%
Other

100

50%

80

40%

60

30%

40

20%

20

10%

Q1-2008

Q1-2009

Q1-2010

Q4-2010

0%
Mar-05

Past Due Loans as Percent of Total Loans
Within Sectors
Governm ent
Com m ercial
Agriculture
Individual

Jun-06

Sep-07

Dec-08

Mar-10

Cotton financing has been problematic. Farmers have typically borrowed from investors (rather than
banks) who granted in-kind loans and were repaid in-kind. Investors enjoyed a monopoly in the provision of
inputs and financing and a monopsony for the purchase of cotton output. Between 2002 and 2007 the NBT
arranged credit lines from international banks for investors—backed by foreign exchange reserves. The
failure of investors to repay these loans led to the loss of the foreign reserves of the NBT and its negative
capital position. Since 2008, the Ministry of Finance has provided credit to banks which have been on-lent to
farmers. Repayment rates were low, however, leading to NPLs. In the last three years, alternative financing
has been provided by the Tajik Agricultural Financing Framework (TAFF) and the World Bank. Working
with local financial intermediaries and accompanied by technical assistance to train their staff, repayment
rates of these loans have been high.
The recent increase in cotton prices and resulting investor interest has precluded the need for
additional public or commercial bank funds this year. In light of projected future declines in cotton prices,
however, agricultural financing needs to be put on a stronger footing, which could be done in several ways:
(1) ensuring an end to directed lending while simultaneously addressing the overhang of banks’
nonperforming assets related to agriculture; (2) enabling banks to better assess agricultural credit risks,
including through the opening of local branches and establishment of credit bureaus; (3) preventing further
moral hazard by insisting that investors repay cotton loans to the NBT; and (4) increasing farmers’ abilities
and incentives to repay their loans—important steps include full implementation of the Freedom to Farm Act,
and the freedom to independently buy inputs, gin, and sell output. Finally, if support to fill a financing gap is
needed, such support should be through the budget and thereby subject to greater financial discipline and
competing priorities.

25

Table 1. Tajikistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–16
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Act.

Act.

Act.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

(Annual percent change; unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Real GDP
GDP deflator (cumulative)
Headline CPI inflation (end-of-period)
Headline CPI inflation (period average)
Core CPI inflation (period average)

7.9
27.7
11.9
20.4
2.6

3.9
12.7
5.0
6.5
2.0

6.5
12.5
9.8
6.5
2.1

5.8
18.6
12.6
13.9
...

5.0
15.8
9.8
9.7
...

5.0
13.6
7.6
7.6
...

5.0
11.0
5.0
5.0
...

5.0
11.0
5.0
5.0
...

5.0
11.0
5.0
5.0
...

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
Investment and saving 1/
Investment
Of which :Fixed capital investment
Government
Private

20.4
19.6
13.6
6.0

18.8
14.3
13.3
1.0

17.9
12.9
10.9
2.0

20.2
15.2
12.2
3.0

19.3
14.8
10.8
4.0

18.9
15.9
9.9
6.0

18.8
15.8
8.8
7.0

19.0
16.0
8.5
7.5

19.0
17.5
9.0
8.5

12.8
8.1
4.7

12.8
7.8
5.0

20.1
7.2
12.9

16.5
6.8
9.7

12.3
6.8
5.6

12.6
6.6
6.0

12.9
6.3
6.6

13.1
6.2
6.9

14.7
6.2
8.6

22.1
18.7
27.6
12.6
13.6

23.4
17.6
28.8
14.6
13.3

23.2
18.0
26.9
15.0
10.9

22.8
17.7
28.2
16.0
12.2

22.4
17.8
26.5
15.6
10.8

22.2
17.9
25.5
15.7
9.9

21.9
18.0
24.4
15.6
8.8

21.7
18.1
24.1
15.5
8.5

21.8
18.2
24.7
15.6
9.0

Overall balance (excl. PIP and stat. discrepancy) 6/
Overall balance (incl. PIP and stat. discrepancy) 6/
Domestic financing
External financing

1.4
-5.5
-1.0
6.5

-0.5
-5.4
1.3
4.2

-0.4
-3.7
-0.4
4.1

-1.0
-5.4
1.2
4.2

-0.5
-4.1
1.3
2.8

-0.5
-3.3
1.6
1.7

0.0
-2.5
1.0
1.5

0.0
-2.3
0.9
1.4

0.0
-2.8
0.9
1.9

Overall balance (incl. PIP and stat. discrepancy) + Roghun OJSC 2/

-5.5

-5.4

-1.1

-6.6

-6.6

-5.1

-3.7

-3.6

-2.8

30.1

34.7

36.5

35.2

36.2

37.1

37.2

37.0

35.5

6.3
29.6
19.4
5.8
12.3

39.6
39.2
-2.2
5.1
6.5

26.2
15.8
-15.1
4.9
6.5

22.1
21.2
7.0
5.0
...

22.8
19.8
11.0
4.9
...

21.7
14.7
14.0
4.8
...

18.9
12.0
25.1
4.7
...

18.9
10.8
19.3
4.6
...

18.3
8.6
27.8
4.6
...

Gross national savings
Public
Private
General Government
Revenue and grants
Of which: tax revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Of which: current
Of which: capital

Total public and publicly-guaranteed debt
Monetary sector
Broad money (12-month percent change)
Reserve money (12-month percent change)
Credit to private sector (12-month percent change) 7/
Velocity of broad money (eop)
Interest rate (weighted average NBT bill rate, in percent)

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector 3/
Exports of goods and services (U.S. dollar, percent change)
Imports of goods and services (U.S. dollar, percent change)
Current account balance
Total public and publicly guaranteed external debt
Gross official reserves (in U.S. dollars) 4/
in months of next year's imports 5/
in percent of broad money
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of somoni)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Nominal effective exchange rate (Index 2000=100)
Real effective exchange rate (Index 2000=100)
Average exchange rate (somoni per U.S. dollar)

12.8
45.0
-7.6
29.2
150
0.7
15.1

-12.7
-26.7
-5.9
34.0
278
1.2
16.7

28.4
8.3
2.2
34.4
447
1.4
20.1

28.9
31.0
-3.7
33.1
557
1.6
19.8

-4.7
9.7
-7.0
34.1
627
1.7
16.9

7.0
7.0
-6.2
33.8
697
1.8
14.7

7.9
7.9
-5.9
33.2
767
1.8
13.0

7.5
8.3
-5.9
32.4
867
1.9
11.9

7.6
4.9
-4.3
30.5
1,017
2.1
11.3

17,609 20,623 24,705 30,973 37,665 44,908 52,336 60,992 71,093
5,135 4,982 5,642 6,831 7,762 8,773 9,785 10,965 12,289
82.7
75.0
69.5
...
...
...
...
...
...
104.1
97.3
92.4
...
...
...
...
...
...
3.43
4.14
4.38
...
...
...
...
...
...

Sources: Data provided by the Tajikistan authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Private investment and savings are estimates. Investment includes changes in stocks.
2/ For consolidation, Roghun equity sales in 2010–11 are added to general government revenue. Over 2011–15, it is assumed that the
remaining financing needs of Roghun OJSC are met from external sources at consessional terms.
3/ Receipts from aluminium exports under the tolling arrangements are booked as services exports.
4/ Includes SDR 81.2 million allocation in Q3 2009.
5/ Excluding electricity, which is on barter basis, and imports related to projects financed with loans from China.
6/ For 2012–15, financing will partly come from yet to be identified fiscal measures.
7/ Decline in 2010 is due to resolution of Kredit Invest (KI) carrying large nonperfoming loans to the cotton sector.

26

Table 2. Tajikistan: General Government Operations, 2008–11
(In millions of somoni; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011

H1
Year
Act. EBS/10/206
Overall revenues and grants
Total revenues
Tax revenues

Year
Act.

Proj.

3,895
3,610

4,828
4,120

2,350
2,218

5,570
5,047

5,722
5,153

7,070
6,417
5,478

3,289

3,635

1,953

4,512

4,436

Income and profit tax

453

609

362

784

780

904

Payroll taxes

346

481

258

594

567

730

Property taxes
Taxes on goods and services
International trade and operations tax
Nontax revenues
Of which: Extra-budgetary funds
Grants
Of which: Public Investment Program (PIP) financing
Total expenditures and net lending
Current expenditures
Expenditures on goods and services

121

143

67

158

152

197

2,081

2,122

1,117

2,641

2,582

3,299

288

280

148

335

355

349

320

485

265

535

718

940

176

270

134

284

404

430

286

709

132

523

568

653

135

332 #

85

322

367

492

2,609

6,652

6,457

8,758

4,786

5,906

2,223

3,017

1,598

3,984

3,698

4,956

1,525

2,009

1,065

2,727

2,414

3,410

Wages and salaries

726

971

525

1,141

1,141

1,452

Others

799

1,038

540

1,585

1,274

1,958

222

170

158

284

362

430

54

104

50

127

121

190

53
2

88
15

50
0

105
23

100
0

159
31

Of which: extra-budgetary funds
Interest payments
External
Domestic
Transfers and subsidies
Transfers to households
Subsidies and other current transfers
Capital expenditures
Externally financed PIP
Domestically financed
Net lending 1/
Statistical discrepancy ("+" = additional spending)
Overall balance (incl. PIP)

643

904

483

1,130

1,162

1,356

593

837

450

981

1,087

1,221

51

68

33

149

75

136

2,401

2,736

923

2,522

2,693

3,796

1,344

1,346

357

1,157

1,178

1,884

1,057

1,390

566

1,364

1,515

1,912

163

154

87

147

67

7

79

43

21

…

185

…
-1,688

-970

-1,121

-280

-1,082

-921

Overall balance (excl. PIP and PIP-related grants)

239

-107

-7

-247

-110

-297

Total financing (incl. PIP)

970

1,121

280

1,082

921

1,688

Net external
Disbursements
Program loans
Project loans
Amortization
Net domestic
NBT
Commercial banks
Operations with assets 2/
Accumulation of arrears

1,149

858

224

1,035

1,020

1,315

1,209

1,014

273

1,142

1,118

1,437

0

0

0

307

307

45

1,209

1,014

273

835

811

1,392

-60

-156

-49

-107

-97

-122

-179

262

56

47

-99

374

-175

84

19

-3

215

269

-57

163

10

20

-35

80

53

15

27

30

-280

25

0

0

0

0

0

0

Memorandum items:
Recapitalization bonds–NBT 3/

…

…

…

…

…

140

Recapitalization bonds–commercial banks 3/

…

…

353

…

353

…

Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes 140 million somoni lending to the cotton sector in 2008 and 180 million somoni in 2009.
2/ Includes transfer of MDRI deposits to the NBT in 2010 towards NBT recapitalization.
3/ Issuance to compensate the NBT and banks for losses related to cotton lending as part of cotton debt resolution.

27

Table 3. Tajikistan: General Government Operations, 2008–11
(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

Overall revenues and grants

Act.
22.1

2009
Act.
23.4

2010

2011

H1
Year
Act. EBS/10/206
9.5
22.5

Year
Act.
23.2

Proj.
22.8

Total revenues

20.5

20.0

9.0

20.4

20.9

20.7

Tax revenues

18.7

17.6

7.9

18.3

18.0

17.7

Income and profit tax

2.6

3.0

1.5

3.2

3.2

2.9

Payroll taxes

2.0

2.3

1.0

2.4

2.3

2.4

Property taxes
Taxes on goods and services
International trade and operations tax
Nontax revenues
Of which: Extra-budgetary funds
Grants
Of which: Public Investment Program (PIP) financing
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditures

0.7

0.7

0.3

0.6

0.6

0.6

11.8

10.3

4.5

10.7

10.5

10.6

1.6

1.4

0.6

1.4

1.4

1.1

1.8

2.3

1.1

2.2

2.9

3.0

1.0

1.3

0.5

1.1

1.6

1.4

1.6

3.4

0.5

2.1

2.3

2.1

0.8

1.6 #

0.3

1.3

1.5

1.6

10.6

26.9

26.1

28.3

27.2

28.6

12.6

14.6

6.5

16.1

15.0

16.0

8.7

9.7

4.3

11.0

9.8

11.0

Wages and salaries

4.1

4.7

2.1

4.6

4.6

4.7

Others

4.5

5.0

2.2

6.4

5.2

6.3

1.3

0.8

0.6

1.1

1.5

1.4

Expenditures on goods and services

Of which: extra-budgetary funds
Interest payments
External
Domestic
Transfers and subsidies
Transfers to households
Subsidies and other current transfers
Capital expenditures
Externally financed PIP
Domestically financed
Net lending 1/

0.3

0.5

0.2

0.5

0.5

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.1

3.7

4.4

2.0

4.6

4.7

4.4

3.4

4.1

1.8

4.0

4.4

3.9

0.3

0.3

0.1

0.6

0.3

0.4

13.6

13.3

3.7

10.2

10.9

12.3

7.6

6.5

1.4

4.7

4.8

6.1

6.0

6.7

2.3

5.5

6.1

6.2
0.0

0.9

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.1

…

0.7

…

-5.5

-5.4

-1.1

-4.4

-3.7

-5.5

Overall balance (excl. PIP and PIP-related grants)

1.4

-0.5

0.0

-1.0

-0.4

-1.0

Total financing (incl. PIP)

5.5

5.4

1.1

4.4

3.7

5.5

6.5

4.2

0.9

4.2

4.1

4.2

6.9

4.9

1.1

4.6

4.5

4.6

Program loans

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.2

1.2

0.1

Project loans

6.9

4.9

1.1

3.4

3.3

4.5

-0.3

-0.8

-0.2

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4
1.2

Statistical discrepancy ("+" = additional spending)
Overall balance (incl. PIP)

Net external
Disbursements

Amortization
Net domestic

-1.0

1.3

0.2

0.2

-0.4

NBT

-1.0

0.4

0.1

0.0

0.9

0.9

Commercial banks

-0.3

0.8

0.0

0.1

-0.1

0.3

Operations with assets 2/

0.3

0.1

0.1

0.1

-1.1

0.1

Accumulation of arrears

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

34.7

36.5

35.2

24,705 24,705

30,973

Memorandum items:
Public debt (in percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP (In millions of somoni)

30.1

34.7

…

17,609

20,623

…

Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes 140 million somoni lending to the cotton sector in 2008 and 180 million somoni in 2009.
2/ Includes transfer of MDRI deposits to the NBT in 2010 towards NBT recapitalization.

28
Table 4. Tajikistan: Accounts of the National Bank of Tajikistan, 2008–11
(End-of-period stock; unless otherwise specified)
2010

2011

2008

2009

Dec.
Act.

Dec.
Act.

March June
Act.
Act.

Sept.
Dec.
Dec.
Act. EBS/10/206 Act.

264
369
519
1,592
-949
-949
…

661
1,034
1,217
1,922
-865
-860
-5

779
1,120
1,353
1,447
-1,350
-896
-455

1,382
1,631
1,996
1,324
-1,244
-737
-507

1,274
1,544
1,975
1,753
-735
-506
-228

1,825
1,650
2,096
1,164
-994
-645
-349

1,907
1,731
2,181
1,140
-900
-551
-349

1,988
1,809
2,359
1,234
-787
-439
-349

2,114
1,932
2,491
1,287
-714
-366
-349

2,279
2,092
2,761
1,343
-654
-373
-281

2,359
2,241

1,687
1,577

2,542 2,684 2,939
2,444 2,522 2,392

2,842
2,295

945
334

841
230

854
243

865
253

912
300

2,019
0
40
118
182
2,143

1,247
0
164
110
1,100
2,271

2,133 2,361 1,977
0
-63
-8
154
78
265
98
162
547
255
-76 -372
…
…
…

1,977
0
0
-3
147
186
547
611
-355 1,213
…
…

0
-209
287
611
1,198
…

0
-105
197
611
1,167
…

0
-70
172
611
1,136
…

0
-1
150
611
1,086
…

1,856
1,566
278
157
121

2,583
2,041
533
181
353

2,225 2,273 2,706
1,842 1,961 2,195
380
311
509
193
192
221
187
119
288

3,027 2,990
2,543 2,421
483
565
329
234
154
331

3,047
2,407
637
335
302

3,222
2,545
673
373
301

3,401
2,686
711
414
297

3,622
2,861
759
379
380

29.6

39.2

33.2

23.5

24.7

17.2

15.8

36.9

41.8

25.7

21.2

Net foreign assets
Of which: gross international reserves
Of which : net international reserves

-44.9
15.6
17.3

21.4
37.6
35.8

32.6
57.5
53.0

35.1
53.3
49.5

46.3
37.5
33.2

23.8
29.4
19.8

45.1
34.0
23.9

50.7
37.2
27.5

46.1
35.6
26.5

27.0
18.3
11.1

15.2
22.2
14.8

Net domestic assets
Net credit to general government
Credit to the private sector
Of which : NBT bills
Other items net

74.5
-12.2
83.6
0.7
3.1

17.8
4.5
-36.2
0.0
49.4

0.6
-14.4
2.7
0.0
12.3

-11.6
-15.1
-0.1
-3.0
3.6

-21.6
-12.0
3.2
-0.1
-12.8

-6.6
5.0
44.7
0.0
-56.3

-29.3
-5.0
-28.7
-0.1
4.4

-13.8
20.2
-76.4
-9.4
42.4

-4.3
21.5
-80.5
-1.8
54.7

-1.4
19.6
-76.7
-2.3
55.7

6.0
11.4
-1.1
0.1
-4.2

107
12.7
3.45
…

236
25.6
4.37
38

256
30.2
4.37
...

276
30.1
4.38
...

372
36.0
4.38
...

350
31.8
...
...

375
32.5
4.40
...

390
32.3
...
...

400
32.1
...
...

420
32.6
...
...

444
33.6
...
...

March
Proj.

June
Proj.

Sept.
Proj.

Dec.
Proj.

(In millions of somoni)
Net foreign assets
Of which: Net international reserves 1/ 2/
Gross reserves 2/
Net domestic assets
Net credit to general government
General government
Roghun JSC
Credit to the private sector 3/
Claims on banks
Of which:
Cotton sector
NBT bills
Liquidity loans
Credit to non bank institutions
Other items, net
Of which : Retained profits and provisions (+ losses)

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Bank reserves
Required reserves
Other bank deposits

940
1,208
1,549
1,333
-1,276
-841
-435

(12-month growth in percent of reserve money)
Reserve money

Memorandum items:
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S.dollars)
Net international reserves (percent of broad money)
Official exchange rate (somoni/U.S. dollars)
Guarantee settlement (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Sources: National Bank of Tajikistan, and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Includes SDR 81.2 million allocation in Q3 2009.
2/ Excludes nonmonetary gold.
3/ Increase in the beginning of 2010 reflects reclassification of credits to KI according to debt resolution strategy.

29

Table 5. Tajikistan: Monetary Survey, 2008–11
2008

2009

Dec.

Dec.

March

June

Sept.

Dec.

Dec.

Act.

Act.

Act.

Act.

Act.

EBS/10/206

Act.

2010

2011
March June
Proj.

Proj.

Sept.

Dec.

Proj.

Proj.

(In millions of somoni, end-of-period stock; unless otherwise specified)
Net foreign assets
National Bank of Tajikistan 1/
Commercial banks
Net domestic assets
Net credit to general government (incl. Roghun OJSC)
National Bank of Tajikistan
Commercial banks
Credit to the private sector
Other items, net
Broad money, excl. bills payable
Somoni broad money
Currency outside banks
Deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Bills payable 2/

-256
264
-520
3,181
-1,091
-949
-142
4,530
-257
2,908
1,952
1,406
546
955

700
893
661
779
39
115
3,378 2,845
-797 -1,576
-865 -1,350
68
-225
4,429 3,872
-254
549
4,039 3,704
2,559 2,212
1,776 1,524
783
689
1,480 1,492

17

39

34

989 1,487
940 1,382
49
105
3,060 3,103
-1,198 -1,055
-1,276 -1,244
78
189
3,465 3,657
793
501
4,007 4,538
2,274 2,824
1,548 1,873
726
951
1,734 1,714
41

1,324
1,274
49
3,572
-975
-735
-240
3,449
1,098
4,854
2,754
1,875
879
2,100

1,814
1,825
-11
3,291
-814
-994
179
3,759
346
5,078
3,179
2,011
1,169
1,899

1,896
1,907
-11
3,488
-814
-900
85
3,971
332
5,358
3,354
2,121
1,233
2,003

1,977
1,988
-11
3,682
-814
-787
-27
4,195
301
5,632
3,526
2,230
1,296
2,106

2,103
2,114
-11
3,842
-814
-714
-100
4,386
270
5,918
3,705
2,343
1,362
2,213

2,268
2,279
-11
3,975
-345
-654
309
4,024
296
6,217
3,892
2,338
1,554
2,325

41

26

26

26

26

26

52
(12-month growth)

Broad money, excl. bills payable
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets, incl. bills payable
Net credit to general government
Credit to the private sector
Broad money, excl. bills payable

6.3
-537.6

27.0

28.2

20.2

25.7

44.6

40.5

30.4

22.4

-373.2 -469.1 -2,279.1

38.9

253.7

…

159.3

112.2

99.9

41.4

25.0

-7.5
-6.1
-3.0
…
-2.6
22.6
25.9
6.3
-8.5
…
2.2
-48.3
-16.8
-31.6 -30.8
…
-15.1
2.6
(12-month growth in percent of broad money )
31.5
27.0
28.2
20.2
25.7
44.6

20.3
-32.0
21.1

23.8
-22.8
19.9

20.8
-57.7
7.0

18.0
27.0
19.4

6.2
-27.0
-2.2

31.5

6.3

38.9

40.5

30.4

22.4

-11.5
-23.5
12.0

32.9
13.6
19.2

40.3
19.3
21.0

32.8
20.5
12.3

30.1
28.4
1.8

15.4
15.2
0.3

27.6
28.8
-1.2

27.1
30.5
-3.4

24.7
26.2
-1.5

13.6
16.1
-2.6

8.9
8.9
0.0

Net domestic assets, incl. bills payable
Net credit to general government
Credit to the private sector
Other items, net
Bills payable

17.7
-8.5
26.9
-0.7
-0.1

6.8
10.1
-3.5
0.1
0.7

-8.2
-11.5
-27.8
31.2
0.6

-6.3
-2.3
-50.6
46.6
-0.5

-2.7
2.8
-46.0
40.5
-0.8

4.8
-4.4
-24.3
33.5
0.1

-2.2
-0.4
-16.6
14.8
-0.3

17.4
20.6
2.7
-5.9
-0.2

15.5
9.6
18.2
-12.3
-0.4

16.3
5.3
16.1
-5.1
-0.6

13.5
9.2
5.2
-1.0
0.0

Memorandum items:
Credit to the private sector (12-month percent change)
Deposit dollarization (in percent)
Velocity
Money multiplier

19.4
63.9
5.8
1.6

-2.2
65.6
5.1
1.6

-16.8
68.5
...
...

-31.6
70.5
...
...

-30.8
64.3
...
...

-22.1
…
...
...

-15.1
61.9
4.9
1.7

2.7
…
...
...

18.2
…
...
...

16.1
…
...
...

7.0
…
5.0
1.7

Net foreign assets
National Bank of Tajikistan
Commercial banks

Sources: National Bank of Tajikistan, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Revised from EBS/09/43 to exclude nonmonetary gold.
2/ Liabilities to cotton financiers related to domestic cotton financing.

30
Table 6. Tajikistan: Balance of Payments, 2008–16
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)

Current account

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Act.

Act.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

-392

-295

123

-2,838
-2,721
457
-3,178
-117
-53
2,499
2,343

-1,958
-1,980
408
-2,388
22
-71
1,735
1,622

-1,970
-2,007
575
-2,582
37
-70
2,162
2,040

488
39
313
352
277
-39
300
-94
241
-311

382
120
209
241
137
-32
16
-161
28
171

-83
84
140
185
108
-45
49
11
0
-367

272
108
272
265
119
-32
110
0
0
-218

382
86
201
237
105
-76
190
0
0
-95

438
79
145
245
150
-101
263
0
0
-49

501
49
142
245
150
-104
294
0
0
17

587
51
155
256
150
-101
329
0
0
52

670
70
236
350
150
-115
430
0
0
-66

96
96

88
11

39
-7

19
-37

-160
-193

-110
-142

-76
-108

-62
-94

0
142

-96
-65
-31
...

-128
-128
-15
15

-169
-169
0
0

-110
-110
0
0

-70
-70
0
0

-70
-70
0
0

-74
-70
-4
0

-112
-100
-12
0

-172
-150
-22
0

0

117

176

147

263

212

182

206

30

IMF
Other identified and potential financing
World Bank 6/
AsDB 6/
EC 6/
Anti-crisis Fund

...
...
...
...
...
...

40
76
21
40
16
...

60
116
25
10
11
70

41
107
10
35
12
50

20
83
10
10
13
50

0
32
...
...
...
...

0
32
...
...
...
...

0
32
...
...
...
...

0
30
...
...
...
...

Residual financing gap 7/

...

...

...

...

160

180

150

174

...

5,135
-7.6
150
0.7
1,498
29.2
91
10.5

4,982
-5.9
278
1.2
1,692
34.0
153
20.3

5,642
2.2
447
1.4
1,942
34.4
71
7.3

6,830
-3.7
557
1.6
2,260
33.1
64
5.2

7,762
-7.0
627
1.7
2,646
34.1
112
9.4

Balance on goods and services 1/
Balance on goods
Exports
Imports
Balance on services
Balance on income
Balance on transfers
Of which: migrants' remittances, net
Capital and financial account
Capital transfers
Public sector (net)
Disbursements
Of which: projects financed by China
Amortization
FDI
Commercial bank NFA (- increase)
NBT 2/
Other capital flows and errors and omissions 3/ 4/
Overall balance
Overall balance (excluding budget support grants)
Financing items
Use of international reserves (- increase)
IMF disbursements
Exceptional financing 5/
Financing gap

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Gross reserves
(in months of next year's imports of goods and services) 8/
Total Public and Publicly Guaranteed (PPG) external sector debt 9/
(in percent of GDP)
Debt service on PPG external debt
(in percent of exports of goods and services)

-253

-543

-548

-577

-648

-527

-2,600 -3,034 -3,246 -3,501 -3,804 -3,948
-2,601 -3,027 -3,219 -3,490 -3,824 -3,974
827
744
801
852
921
997
-3,428 -3,772 -4,020 -4,342 -4,745 -4,971
0
-7
-27
-12
19
26
-63
-66
-72
-80
-87
-90
2,410 2,557 2,769 3,004 3,243 3,511
2,293 2,476 2,699 2,942 3,207 3,479

8,773 9,785 10,965 12,289
-6.2
-5.9
-5.9
-4.3
697
767
867
1017
1.8
1.8
1.9
2.1
2,969 3,245 3,548 3,751
33.8
33.2
32.4
30.5
140
150
159
188
11.0
10.9
10.8
11.8

Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Starting from 2005, the export and import figures reflect the transition to the tolling arrangement for aluminium exports.
2/ Includes SDR 82.1 million allocation to Tajikistan in Q3 2009.
3/ Includes change in foreign currency balances held by residents of Tajikistan.
4/ For 2008, includes the decline in other foreign liabilities which resulted from pledged deposits settlement.
5/ Pakistan's government converted Tajikistan's debt into a grant.
6/ Budget support grants.
7/ The financing gap in 2012–15 includes financing for the Roghun HPP. The World Bank feasibility study,instrumental in identifying the financing,
is ongoing.
8/ Excluding electricity, which is on barter basis, and imports related to projects financed with loans from China.
9/ External debt is defined as debt to nonresidents.

31
Table 7. Tajikistan: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2008–15
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
IMF Staff Projections
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

431

327

-78

286

618

649

680

730

392

295

-123

253

543

548

577

628

39
8
31

32
12
20

45
13
32

32
19
14

76
38
38

101
44
56

104
49
55

101
44
57

527

415

-38

305

458

539

605

668

527
300
391
-164

415
16
362
37

-38
49
269
-356

305
110
413
-218

458
190
363
-95

539
263
324
-49

605
294
294
16

668
329
307
31

Change in reserves (- increase)

-65

-128

-169

-110

-70

-70

-70

-100

Financing gap
Financing gap (excluding budget support grants)
Financing items 4/
IMF 5/
Other financing
AsDB
EC
World Bank
Anti-Crisis Fund
Exceptional financing
Unidentified financing

-31
-31
-31
-31
0
…
…
0
…
0
0

40
117
117
25
92
40
16
21
…
15
0

130
176
176
60
116
10
11
25
70
0
0

91
147
147
41
107
35
12
10
50
0
0

230
263
263
20
243
10
13
10
50
0
160

180
212
212
0
212
10
12
10
0
0
180

146
178
178
-4
182
10
12
10
0
0
150

162
194
194
-12
206
10
12
10
0
0
174

Total requirements
Current account deficit
Debt amortization
Multilateral 1/
Bilateral
Total sources
Capital inflows
Foreign direct investment
Disbursement from official creditors 2/
Other flows 3/

Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff calculations.
1/ Excluding the IMF.
2/ Includes project loans and grants.
3/ Includes all other net financial flows, and errors and omissions.
4/ Includes estimates for potential financing.
5/ Net of repurchases.

32
Table 8. Tajikistan: Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–20
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Existing and prospective Fund credit 1/
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports
In percent of external debt
In percent of gross reserves
In percent of quota

65.3
99.6
10.3
3.3
22.3
75.0

91.4 104.4
143.0 163.4
11.4
13.7
4.2
4.2
25.7
26.0
105.0 120.0

104.4
163.4
12.8
3.7
23.4
120.0

101.8
159.4
11.6
3.2
20.8
117.0

94.0 79.6 60.0
147.1 124.6 94.0
10.0
7.8
5.4
2.7
2.1
1.5
17.0 12.2 8.0
108.0 91.5 69.0

Fund obligation based on existing credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports
In percent of external debt
In percent of gross reserves
In percent of quota

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2

0.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

2.8
4.3
0.3
0.1
0.8
3.2

8.0
12.5
0.8
0.2
2.0
9.2

13.2
20.6
1.3
0.4
3.1
15.1

Fund obligation based on existing and
prospective credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports
In percent of external debt
In percent of gross reserves
In percent of quota

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.3
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3

0.3
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3

2.9
4.5
0.3
0.1
0.8
3.3

8.1
12.6
0.9
0.2
2.0
9.3

14.6
22.8
1.4
0.4
3.4
16.8

Memorandum items:
Gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Quota (in millions of SDRs)

447
87

557
87

627
87

697
87

767
87

867
87

1,017 1,167 1,317 1,467 1,617
87
87
87
87
87

Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ End of period.

2016 2017 2018

2019

2020

39.2
61.3
3.2
1.0
4.7
45.0

20.9
32.7
1.5
0.5
2.2
24.0

7.8
12.3
0.5
0.2
0.8
9.0

13.1
20.6
1.2
0.3
2.9
15.1

13.1
20.5
1.1
0.3
2.8
15.1

10.5
16.4
0.8
0.2
2.2
12.0

5.2
8.2
0.4
0.1
1.0
6.0

19.8
30.9
1.8
0.5
4.4
22.7

21.0
32.9
1.7
0.5
4.5
24.1

18.4
28.7
1.4
0.4
3.8
21.1

13.1
20.5
0.9
0.3
2.6
15.0

Table 9. Tajikistan: Reviews and Disbursements under the Three-Year ECF Arrangement, 2009–12 1/

Date

Action

Original
Disbursements

Augmentation

(in million SDRs) (in million SDRs)

Disbursements After
Augmentation
(in million SDRs)

Approval of the ECF arrangement

26.100

…

26.100

On or after April 15, 2010

Completion of the first and second reviews

26.120

…

26.120

On or after September 15, 2010

Completion of the third review

6.523

6.523

13.045

On or after March 15, 2011

Completion of the fourth review

6.523

6.523

13.045

On or after September 15, 2011

Completion of the fifth review

6.523

6.523

13.045

On or after March 15, 2012

Completion of the sixth review

6.523

6.523

13.045

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ This table assumes SDR 26.1 million augmentation of the existing ECF in 2009–12.

33

On May 7, 2009

Table 10. Tajikistan: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2004–10
(In percent; unless otherwise indicated)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Jun-10

Sep-10

Dec-10

Capital adequacy
Tier I capital as percent of risk-weighted assets
Reported total capital to risk -weighted assets (K1-1)

38.7
44.7

34.2
37.9

27.8
30.4

19.4
21.3

24.2
29.2

25.4
30.0

23.8
26.3

22.9
24.6

24.5
26.3

Asset quality 1/
Nonperforming loans to gross loans
excluding Agroinvestbank
Nonperforming loans to gross loans 2/
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to reg. capital
Provisions to nonperforming loans
Banks exceeding maximum single borrower limit 3/

20.6
n.a.
n.a.
19.3
47.2
3of12

14.3
n.a
n.a
16.1
36.8
2of12

11.3
n.a.
4.1
18.2
27.8
1of9

4.8
n.a.
2.8
8.2
40.5
1of10

9.5
n.a.
5.4
16.8
32.5
1of12

21.6
n.a.
10.4
38.5
29.4
1of13

24.1
n.a.
13.5
44.8
30.5
2 of 14

19.7
n.a.
11.9
35.2
37.9
4 of 14

17.2
7.5
31.2
35.9
0 of 14

2.9
10.2
42.7
61.0
25.8

4.7
17.2
48.2
55.2
27.1

3.8
16.1
47.9
63.2
21.6

2.7
16.8
57.5
59.7
26.5

2.0
11.0
59.6
55.3
32.1

0.8
3.4
53.0
67.1
21.1

-1.7
-7.9
49.6
60.7
26.8

-0.6
-3.0
48.6
70.1
22.9

0.8
3.8
51.4
63.9
23.2

36.9
113.5
71.2

30.0
80.2
54.9

39.9
84.0
57.9

39.9
112.6
61.3

27.2
104.1
60.0

28.2
112.2
56.6

23.4
109.7
50.9

24.6
125.3
53.5

24.2
133.5
49.8

8.8 long 5.9 long

13.4 long

6.3 long

6.7 long 6.1 long 8.5 long

0.33 short

Earnings and profitability
Reported return on assets (ROA)
Reported return on equity (ROE)
Interest income to gross income
Non-interest expenditures to gross income
Salary expenditures to non-interest expenditures
Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to demand and savings deposits
Liquid assets to total deposits
Sensitivity to market risk
Net open position in foreign exchange to capital
Sources: National Bank of Tajikistan.
1/ Nonperforming loans includes loans more than 1 day overdue.
2/ Nonperforming loans includes loans more than 30 day overdue.
3/ Maximum single borrower limit is defined as 25 percent of capital (K3-1).

36.3 long

34

2004

35
ATTACHMENT I. TAJIKISTAN: LETTER OF INTENT
April 19, 2011
His Excellency
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
I would like to express my gratitude to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for its
continued support of our economic reforms. Tajikistan is emerging from the worst of the
global economic crisis. However, we are of the view that economic and financial risks
remain, and that work must continue to address the damage caused during the crisis.
Continued support from the international financial institutions (IFIs) and donors will be
critical.
Economic performance in 2010 was strong. Real GDP growth registered some 6.5 percent,
fueled by power production, construction, beneficial increases in cotton and aluminum
prices, and higher remittances. This was a welcome recovery from low growth in 2009, and
we will seek to foster this nascent recovery in 2011. We were not without challenges,
however. Reflecting trends in international markets, food prices rose in the second half of the
year, contributing to higher-than-expected inflation. Financial sector indicators also remain a
concern, and we intend to devote more attention to finding a solution for this problem.
I am pleased to report that, with three exceptions (the continuous performance criterion on
the non-accumulation of external payments arrears, and the indicative targets on government
social spending and on liquidity loans from the NBT), we met all the quantitative targets for
end-December 2010. Despite considerable external shocks, we managed to continue building
international reserves through the course of the year, maintain a prudent fiscal stance, and
meet our budgetary objectives for health and education spending as well as for critical
infrastructure. Out of concern for meeting the overall fiscal target, however, we restricted the
increase in public wages and salaries for 2010, and did not fill a number of vacancies, which
contributed to lower social sector spending than expected.
Liquidity lending from the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) to commercial banks rose
above the indicative target under the program. Part of this increase was linked to a decision
to finance key food and fuel imports and ensure sufficient supply to the market as prices for
these goods increased. Liquidity lending from the NBT to the commercial banking system
continued to rise in the first two months of 2011, however, and we recognize the potential

36
risk that such lending could pose to inflation, the exchange rate, and the NBT balance sheet.
We are committed to bringing such lending under control, as discussed below, to ensure a
path for money growth that is consistent with macroeconomic stability.
With respect to structural reforms, all benchmarks for the second half of 2010 have been met,
albeit with small delays for two of the benchmarks. The audited financial statements for the
NBT were published on its website in September. In early January, we submitted to
parliament a revised NBT Law, as well as a Law on Insolvent Credit Institutions. We are
grateful to the IMF and the World Bank, respectively, for technical assistance in drafting
these two laws.
We also continue to move forward in increasing transparency in the state enterprise sector.
The Roghun OJSC published its second quarterly report on financial flows and operations on
the Ministry of Finance website in December 2010, and we expect to hold the first
shareholder meeting in May 2011. Work continues on the audit of Roghun OJSC, but
because of the need to first carry out a survey of work in progress, we request the rephasing
of this benchmark from end-February 2011 until end-June 2011. In the meantime, however,
we expect to publish the audited 2009 financial statement of Talco in the near future, and the
audited financial statements for Talco Management by end June 2011 (a structural
benchmark under the program).
We request a waiver for the non-observance of the continuous performance criterion on nonaccumulation of external payments arrears. These arrears, which were linked to two
government guaranteed loans, were cleared in a relatively short period, and the most recent
installment on one of these loans was paid in advance. We have also instituted a new pledge
agreement imposing a penalty interest on arrears for this loan, and will expand this practice
to other borrowers. We are also seeking to institute a new accounting system for guaranteed
loans to prevent accumulation of new arrears, and will enhance communication between the
government, borrowers, and creditors. We will in future also continue to restrict the use of
government guarantees, and have also requested a Debt Management Performance
Assessment (DEMPA) from the World Bank. The end result will be a substantial
improvement in our ability to track and deliver on external obligations and a strengthening of
public financial management.
Looking ahead, we remain committed to achieving the reforms outlined in the Memorandum
of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) of November 9, 2010. In this context, two points
in particular are worth highlighting. First, we are working to enforce the presidential order of
August 2010 requiring investors to repay cotton loans as part of the strategy to recapitalize
the NBT. As committed, we will also produce this year an agreed schedule of government
injections into the NBT (a structural benchmark for end-June 2011). Second, we remain
committed to producing a strategic plan to reform the tax regime—with a view to broadening

37
the tax base, increasing tax revenue, and creating an environment conducive to private sector
growth (a structural benchmark for end-September 2011).
In addition, and reflecting some of the problems noted above, we commit to the following
measures:


The recent surge in liquidity lending from the NBT to commercial banks will be
contained and brought under tighter control in the course of the year. Future
operations to finance imports for the strategic reserve will be handled through the
budget. The remaining stock of liquidity loans will be reduced to ensure orderly
money growth consistent with macroeconomic and price stability. The government
will also refrain from directed lending.



To protect the balance sheet of the NBT, better establish its role as a lender of last
resort, and encourage development of an interbank market, applications for liquidity
loans will receive greater scrutiny. The terms of these loans were tightened at the end
of March 2011, by raising interest rates on liquidity loans to prevailing market rates.
Strict observation of collateral requirements will also be enforced. The NBT will
continue to work closely with the IMF on this issue.



An action plan—consistent with IMF advice—to bolster supervision and strengthen
the financial sector will be formulated and endorsed by the Board of the NBT by June
2011 (a structural benchmark). It will provide a sequenced process covering
regulation, accounting of assets, provisions, and collateral, revaluation of these items,
recognition of these changes in the balance sheet, and compliance with prudential
regulations. Progress in implementing this plan will be monitored in coordination
with the IMF.



Subject to resource availability and with a view to strengthening commercial banks’
balance sheets and enhance liquidity, the government bonds placed with commercial
banks as part of the cotton debt resolution will be re-issued on market terms.

While recent data on macroeconomic performance are encouraging, we remain concerned
about the recent surge in international food prices, and the potential impact on the poor. We
ask the international community for assistance in this area, and look to the IMF and other
IFIs for close support and coordination of measures to mitigate the impact of higher food
prices on the most vulnerable segments of society.
We hereby request completion by the Executive Board of the fourth review under the ECF
arrangement, and disbursement of the fifth loan totaling an amount equivalent to SDR 13.045
million. In parallel, we are seeking continued concessional support from other donors for the
coming year to achieve the objectives laid out in the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS)

38
covering the period 2010–12. For the fourth review under the ECF arrangement we request a
waiver for nonobservance of the performance criterion on the non-accumulation of external
payments arrears. We also request the modification of the quantitative performance criterion
on net domestic assets for end-June 2011 and end-December 2011, as well as indicative
targets, and structural benchmarks described in the attached tables, the MEFP of November
9, 2010, and modification to the attached TMU, to enable us to monitor progress in
implementing our reform agenda.
The Government believes that the policies set forth in this letter and the MEFP are adequate
to achieve the objectives of its program, but will take any further measures that may become
appropriate for this purpose. We will consult with the Fund on the adoption of these
measures and in advance of any revision to the policies contained in the MEFP, in
accordance with the Fund’s policies on such consultation. We intend to remain in close
consultation with Fund staff and provide timely information necessary for monitoring
economic developments and implementation of policies under the ECF arrangement. In
addition, the Government stands ready to take any further measures that might be required to
ensure that the overall objectives of the program are attained.
Finally, in continuing with our commitment to transparency, we hereby request that all
program related documents, including this letter, be published on the IMF website.
Your Excellency, please accept my assurances of my highest consideration,
/s/
Emomali Rahmon
President of the Republic of Tajikistan

Table 1. Tajikistan: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets under the 2010 Extended Credit Facility (ECF)
(In millions of somoni; unless otherwise indicated)
2009
End-Dec
Act.

End-March
Prog.
Act.

End-June
Prog.
Act.

2010
End-Sept.
Prog. Adj. Prog.

Act.

End-Dec.
Prog.
Adj. Prog. 4/

Act.

2011
End-March
Prog.

Quantitative Performance Criteria (PC):
1.

Ceiling on cumulative flow of net domestic assets of the NBT 1/ 2/

...

-430

-452

-344

-464

-108

-414

-447

226

-80

-480

-6

2.

Floor on cumulative flow of total net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/ 2/

...

3

21

12

26

33

103

119

48

111

118

14

3.

Zero-ceiling on new lending from the NBT to private sector (continuous quantitative
performance criterion) 2/

...

0

0

0

0

0

…

0

0

…

0

0

4.

Floor on cumulative overall fiscal balance of the general government excluding foreignfinanced Public Investment Program and related grants 2/
Ceiling on general government wage and pension arrears (continuous quantitative
performance criterion)
Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of any non-concessional external debt (continuous
quantitative performance criterion)
Ceiling on disbursements of concessional external financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/

…

-53

6

-135

-7

-192

…

-53

-247

…

-110

-66

...

0

0

0

0

0

…

15

0

…

0

0

5.
6.
7.
8.

New external payments arrears (in millions of U.S. dollars, continuous quantitative
performance criterion)

0

30

0

15

0

…

0

0

…

0

0

122

23

173

59

229

299

158

272

342

255

77

...

0

0.110

0

0.028

0

…

0.002

0

…

0.000

0

...
...
...
...

989
559
800
179

929
405
799
154

1,997
1,118
850
153

1,955
1,010
820
78

3,102
1,680
870
150

…
…
…
…

3,095
1,539
820
265

4,428
2,351
880
147

…
…
…
…

4,438
2,222
830
190

1,223
710
880
140

1,458
265

1,814
272

1,508
342

1,475
358

2,148
287

1,842
350

1,442
357

1,836
365

Indicative Targets (IT):
1.
2.
3.
4.

Floor on tax collection 2/
Floor on social and poverty-related expenditure 2/
Ceiling on gross equity sales and contributions for Roghun (in millions of somoni) 3/
Ceiling on loans to banks for liquidity purposes by the NBT (stock)

Memorandum items:
Program exchange rate
4.37
NDA of the NBT (in millions of somoni) 1/
1,922
1,492
1,470
1,578
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
239
242
260
251
1/ At program exchange rates of end-December 2009.
2/ Cumulative from January 1 of the year; performace criteria for end-June and end-December 2010, and indicative targets other dates.
3/ Cumulative from January 1, 2010.
4/ Floor on cumulative NIR is adjusted and revised.

39

...
...

Table 2. Tajikistan: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets under the 2011 Extended Credit Facility (ECF)
(In millions of somoni; unless otherwise indicated)
2010
End-Dec
Act.

End-March
Prog. 4/
Prel. Proj. 5/

2011
End-June
Prog.

End-Sept. End-Dec.
Prog.
Prog.

Quantitative Performance Criteria (PC):
Ceiling on cumulative flow of net domestic assets of the NBT 1/ 2/

…

-6

-8

120

210

328

2.

Floor on cumulative flow of total net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/ 2/

…

14

14

25

45

70

3.

Zero-ceiling on new lending from the NBT to private sector (continuous quantitative
performance criterion) 2/

…

0

0

0

0

0

4.

…

-66

-66

-134

-208

-297

…

0

0

0

0

0

…

0

0

0

0

0

7.

Floor on cumulative overall fiscal balance of the general government excluding foreignfinanced Public Investment Program and related grants 2/
Ceiling on general government wage and pension arrears (continuous quantitative
performance criterion)
Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of any non-concessional external debt (continuous
quantitative performance criterion)
Ceiling on disbursements of concessional external financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/

…

77

77

154

231

308

8.

New external payments arrears (continuous quantitative performance criterion)

…

0

0

0

0

0

…
…
…
…

1,223
710
880
140

1,223
710
880
377

2,470
1,421
880
227

3,837
2,131
880
180

5,478
2,841
880
157

5.
6.

Indicative Targets (IT):
1.
2.
3.
4.

Floor on tax collection 2/
Floor on social and poverty-related expenditure 2/
Ceiling on gross equity sales and contributions for Roghun (in millions of somoni) 3/
Ceiling on loans to banks for liquidity purposes by the NBT (average per quarter)

Memorandum items:
Program exchange rate
4.40
NDA of the NBT (in millions of somoni) 1/
1,164
1,836
1,156
1,285
1,375
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
375
365
390
400
420
1/ At program exchange rates of end-December 2010.
2/ Cumulative from January 1 of the year; performance criteria for end-June and end-December 2011, and indicative targets for end-March and end-September.
3/ Cumulative from January 1, 2010.
4/ Valued at exchange rate of end-December 2009.
5/ Reflects staff discussions with authorities during February 2011 mission.

1,492
444

40

1.

41
Table 3. Tajikistan: Structural Benchmarks for 2010
Date

Rationale

Status

Structural Benchmarks and Prior Actions for Third
Review
End-June
Issue a government order to require cotton investors to start
paying principal (in equal installments) and interest on their
outstanding debt to the NBT

Key element of
NBT
recapitalization
strategy

Met on August 12,
2010

Issue a tender for an audit of the 2008 and 2009 financial
statements of Roghun OJSC by a reputable international firm.

End-June

Transparency

Met on June 30,
2010.

Issue a tender for an external audit of Talco Management’s
2008 and 2009 financial statements by a reputable
international audit firm.

5 working days
prior to Executive
Board Meeting

Transparency

Met on November 3,
2010

Roghun supervisory board report on a quarterly basis to the
public about the sources and uses of funds, including detailed
information on the contractors hired by Roghun OJSC, their
owners, and the bidding process used to award all contracts.

5 working days
prior to Executive
Board Meeting
and each quarter
thereafter

Transparency
and
governance

Met on November
12, 2010 (Q1, Q2)
Met on December
24, 2010 (Q3)
Met on March 30,
2011 (Q4)

Publish the NBT’s December 2009 audited financial statement
together with the audit report on the NBT’s website.

End-September

Transparency

Met on September
30, 2010

Submit to parliament a bankruptcy law for credit institutions.

End-December

Strengthen the
banking system

Met on January 4,
2011

Submit to parliament a draft NBT law consistent with IMF staff
advice.

End-December

Enhance
central bank
governance

Met on January 4,
2011

Structural Benchmarks for Second Half of 2010

42

Table 4. Tajikistan: Structural Benchmarks for 2011
Date

Rationale

Banks not meeting established prudential criteria to submit to
NBT for approval time-bound actions plans to become fully
compliant with these standards, including correct provisioning
for non-performing loans.

End-March

Financial sector
stability

Publish the audited financial statements of Roghun OJSC for
2008 and 2009 with the audit reports on the Ministry of
Finance’s website.

End-June

Transparency

Expand the number of large taxpayers under the Large
Taxpayer Inspectorate (LTI).

End-June

PFM / Revenue

Issue a government resolution specifying a multi-year (20112018) schedule for injections of capital from the government
into the NBT as part of the NBT recapitalization plan and in
line with IMF recommendations.

End-June

NBT
recapitalization

Publish the audited financial statements of Talco Management
for 2008-2009 together with the audit reports.

End-June

Transparency

NBT Board to approve an action plan, in line with IMF
recommendations, for addressing weaknesses in the financial
sector.

End-June

Financial sector
stability

National Bank of Tajikistan to publish audited 2010 financial
statement

End-September

Transparency

Submit to cabinet a strategy for reform of the tax regime.

End-September

Revenue

Fiscal risk statement related to condition of SOEs to be
introduced as part of the published 2012 budget document

End-December

SOE governance

Status
Met on
March 31,
2011

43
ATTACHMENT II. TAJIKISTAN: MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
(MEFP) FOR 2009–12
November 9, 2010
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This memorandum outlines economic and financial policies of the Government of
Tajikistan for 2010–12, and augments President Rahmon’s letter of intent and the
memorandum of economic and financial policies dated May 20, 2010, focusing now on our
policies for the remainder of 2010 and 2011. These policies are intended to serve as the basis
for the ongoing IMF-supported program under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF).
1.
Tajikistan now appears to be emerging from the global economic downturn of 2009,
although the impact of external shocks continue to be felt in some sectors. Real economic
growth rose to over 7 percent in the first half of 2010, with particularly strong performance in
electricity production, construction, and trade and services. We expect real GDP growth to
reach at least 5.5 percent for the year as a whole. Inward remittances have also rebounded, in
line with the recovery in neighboring economies. Total inward remittances increased by
about 25 percent year-on-year through June, providing welcome income support. Inflation
has been subdued for most of the year, thanks to a benign global environment. However, we
expect end-year inflation to reach about 9 percent due to the recent surge in wheat and wheat
flour prices. Financial sector indicators have worsened—lagging the incipient recovery and
reflecting continued difficulties in the external, agricultural, and state enterprise sectors.
2.
In this environment, our program focuses on safeguarding macroeconomic and
balance of payments stability, supporting the poor and vulnerable segments of society,
moving ahead with key infrastructure projects to address Tajikistan’s bottlenecks in the
energy sector, and accelerating structural reforms, including by strengthening governance of
public sector institutions and enhancing the role of the private sector.
3.
We have reached understandings with IMF staff on a set of prior actions for the third
review, and on quantitative performance criteria, indicative targets, and structural
benchmarks for 2011. Our policy framework continues to build on the measures that we
implemented during the Staff Monitored Program, and draw on more recent work, such as
the special audit of the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT), the 2007–08 Financial Sector
Assessment Program, the safeguards assessment, and technical assistance in tax
administration and public financial management.
4.
Our macroeconomic policies are based the government’s National Development
Strategy for the period until 2015, and our Poverty Reduction Strategy (2010–12). In the
short term, our program aims to maintain macroeconomic stability—which is a precondition
for sustained high growth and poverty reduction. Structural reforms in financial, state-owned
enterprise (SOEs), and agriculture sectors are designed to enhance the growth potential of our

44
economy over the medium-term. In addition, we intend to move forward with key
infrastructure projects in the energy sector. We believe that these reforms will give rise to
sustained higher rates of economic growth, which will in turn make the biggest impact on
poverty. In this context, we are committed to the principle that planned increases in bettertargeted social spending and associated recurrent costs be fully covered by revenue from tax,
administrative, and public financial management reforms. Given limited fiscal space, we are
working closely with the Donor Coordination Council to further streamline and prioritize the
PRS.
II. MACROECONOMIC POLICIES
5.
Within our overall macroeconomic policy framework, the construction of the Roghun
hydropower plant (HPP) is of the highest strategic importance to address Tajikistan’s energy
deficit and thus lay the foundation for future growth and poverty reduction. This will be
crucial to meet Tajikistan’s growing energy needs, though additional generation capacity and
significant maintenance on existing facilities is likely to be needed.
6.
Construction of Roghun and its financing will impact our macroeconomic objectives
in 2010 and beyond. The total cost of the project’s first phase is estimated at around
SM6 billion ($1.4 billion, or 24 percent of 2010 GDP) of which around $600 million would
be imports. We have established a joint stock company (Roghun OJSC) with an authorized
capital of SM 6 billion, 75 percent of which will be owned by the government. Beginning in
January 2010, we offered equity to the public of up to 25 percent of the shares (SM
1.5 billion). Initial equity purchases and contributions yielded SM 800 million through March
2010. The Roghun advertising campaign was subsequently suspended in mid April. Since
that time, a very small level of contributions have continued to accumulate (in the form of
deposits of Roghun OJSC with commercial banks and a special treasury subaccount at the
NBT), bringing the total level of shares sold to SM 820 million by end-June. We expect total
shares sold to remain below SM 880 million by the end of the year. Through end-August,
some 205 million of these deposits had been used to finance work on the project. Once the
results of a techno-economic, social and environmental impact assessment of the Roghun
project are available, we will revisit our financing strategy in close consultation with Fund
and World Bank staff, and intend to request the World Bank to lead an international
financing consortium.
7.
A supervisory board, headed by the prime minister and consisting of government
officials as well as representatives of private sector shareholders, oversees all financial
aspects of the Roghun OJSC. The first quarterly report to the public about the sources and
uses of funds, including detailed information on the contractors hired by Roghun OJSC, their
owners, and the bidding process used to award all contracts will be published on the Ministry
of Finance’s website as of November 2010 (benchmark for end-June 2010). We tendered an
audit of Roghun OJSC’s 2008 and 2009 financial statements to a reputable international
accounting firm at end-June (benchmark for end-June 2010). However we encountered

45
delays in finding a suitable auditor, and therefore now expect the first audit to be published
by end-February 2011 (benchmark), rather than end-December 2010, as originally
envisioned. Regular audits by a reputable international firm will continue on an annual basis.
A first shareholder meeting will be convened by end-February 2011. In this context, we will
abide by the principles set out in the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of StateOwned Enterprises. In particular, we commit to equitable treatment of all shareholders and
will, from October 2010 onwards, take all measures to enact registration of all minority
shareholders and give them the opportunity to participate in major corporate decisions. Once
profits allow, Roghun OJSC will make dividend payments to all shareholders.
8.
Against this background, we have reached an understanding with IMF staff on
macroeconomic policies for the remainder of 2010 and 2011. In the fiscal area, we will
adhere to the deficit target of 1 percent of GDP for 2010 (excluding the externally financed
public investment program—PIP) previously agreed with the IMF. For 2011, we will seek to
achieve GDP growth of at least 5 percent, and limit year-end inflation to 7 percent. Given the
need to balance pressing social and development needs against limited domestic resources,
we intend to target a deficit of 1 percent of GDP. This will help to ensure that the economic
recovery does not falter, and that the government can modestly increase social spending. We
will protect social spending from expenditure cuts in case of unexpected revenue shortfalls,
and use any additional donor grants (if forthcoming) for spending in this area. We will also
closely monitor the overall deficit (including the externally financed PIP) closely to ensure
debt sustainability. Monetary policy will continue to target reserve money growth as the
nominal anchor, while we will maintain our flexible exchange rate regime. We aim to raise
reserve cover from its current low levels by further accumulating net international reserves
(NIR). In this context, the NBT will limit its interventions in the foreign exchange market to
smoothing excess volatility.
9.
In the medium term, we hope that a more favorable international environment will
pave the way toward higher growth and external balance. In these circumstances we hope to
significantly strengthen our international reserves position, and target a reserves coverage of
2 months of imports by 2015. In the fiscal area, we will balance the pressing spending needs
in the social and infrastructure areas, while broadly aiming for overall fiscal balance
(excluding PIP), with a view to keeping government debt below the ceiling of 40 percent of
GDP that we have set in our debt strategy. In this context, we are committed to strengthen
public debt management and reporting by public enterprises. Our strategy also addresses the
fiscal impact of the cotton debt resolution (paragraph 13).
III. STRUCTURAL REFORMS FOR 2010-2011
A. Monetary and Financial Sector Reforms
10.
A safeguards assessment update of the NBT was completed in mid-2010. The
findings indicated that initial steps have been taken to address the risks identified by the

46
special audit on cotton sector financing, but that considerable safeguards risks at the NBT
remain. Both the accounting and the organizational structure are still fragmented, and due to
the weak internal audit function and an absence of any external independent oversight, access
to broad and complete information has been restricted. Consequently, there is a need to
further enhance data systems and the transparency of operational integrity. Restoring the
credibility of the central bank and building the required capacity in key functions, such as
internal audit and financial reporting will require more time. Under our NBT action plan
(shown in Table 1) we are implementing the main recommendations of the special audit of
the NBT, as well as recommendations of the safeguards assessment A task force, chaired by
a non-executive Board Director, to assess progress on these reforms on a semi-annual basis
was appointed in June 2010. To ensure transparency and accountability, we are also fully
committed to semi-annual external reviews of the NBT’s net international reserves.
11.
Amendments to the NBT Law in 2009 addressed key shortcomings that needed
immediate action. With the objective of bringing the law in its entirety in line with
international practices, we initiated an internal review in July 2010 and have also received
input and recommendations from an IMF technical assistance mission in October. We intend
to submit to parliament a draft NBT law consistent with Fund staff advice by end-December
2010 (benchmark), with a view to adopting the law by June 2011.
12.
Our NBT recapitalization strategy balances the NBT’s needs (strong balance sheet,
instruments for monetary policy) and the government’s interests (minimize fiscal costs). As
part of the strategy, the government has resumed servicing the recapitalization bonds held by
the NBT, and transferred deposits from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) from
government accounts to the NBT. The NBT has in turn resumed paying interest on
government deposits. In addition, the government will make annual capital injections into the
NBT over the coming eight years, starting in 2011. A presidential decree was issued in
August 2010 requiring cotton investors to begin paying quarterly principal (in equal
installments) and interest on their outstanding debt to the NBT (benchmark for end-June
2010). Bilateral agreements with 10 of the 12 investors have already been signed and we
expect payments to begin by end-September. To contribute to its recapitalization, the NBT
continues to work on improving its reserve management practices. An updated strategy,
taking into account progress to date and changes in market conditions, will be completed by
end-2010 with IMF assistance—the recommendations of which will be accounted for in the
official 2011 budget.
13.
In its monetary policy operations, the NBT will continue to refrain from issuing new
credits to the private sector, except for liquidity purposes or in cases of bank distress or
failure (lender of last resort). All lending to commercial banks and nonbank financial
institutions is restricted to the NBT’s short-term liquidity facility. In consultation with IMF
staff, we also adopted in mid-year a regulation establishing a remunerated deposit facility
with the NBT to serve as the only deposit facility available to banks to increase the NBT’s
flexibility in managing its excess liquidity.

47
14.
We seek to strengthen Tajikistan’s financial sector with a view to reinvigorating
private sector credit growth. The NBT monitors closely potential vulnerabilities in the
banking system, paying close attention to banks’ loan classification—including through onsite visits—and the Uniform Bank Performance Reports. Banks’ asset quality deteriorated in
2010, impeding their scope for credit extension. Financial sector indicators have continued to
show weaknesses, with a small number of banks consistently violating prudential rules
(including on single party exposure limits and reserve requirements). To address these issues,
the Ministry of Finance issued in May 2010 some $90 million (SM350 million) in
recapitalization bonds (as part of the cotton debt resolution) to commercial banks to improve
their asset quality. When resources permit, we will review the terms of these bills with a view
to enhancing their liquidity and value as collateral. By end-December the NBT will also
submit to parliament a bankruptcy law for credit institutions (benchmark) in consultation
with IMF staff, thereby filling a gap in our commercial bank legislation. The NBT will also
require those banks not in compliance with prudential rules by end-March 2011 to develop
and submit to the NBT for approval time bound plans to become fully compliant with all
standards (benchmark), including correct provisioning for non-performing loans. We are also
working with the World Bank to establish an appropriate anti-money laundering and
counterterrorism financing framework (AML/CFT), and will submit an AML/CFT law to
parliament by end-December 2010.
B. Reforms in the Fiscal Area
15.
With assistance from the World Bank, we continue strengthening the civil service,
and the health, and education sectors. In the health sector, this involves allocating resources
in an asymmetric fashion favoring primary health care. In education, we are moving ahead
with a per capita funding pilot system. In this context, we are working toward a competitive
and affordable civil service wage system. We raised the minimum wage and pension in July,
and in October raised public sector salaries in the context of introducing a new grade scale at
five pilot government agencies. A new health insurance law has been passed that plans, over
the medium-term, to introduce mandatory universal health insurance. We are also preparing a
new pension law that seeks to reform the pay-as-you-go and the fully funded pillar, and
generate an actuarially balanced system for migrant workers with pension entitlements.
Implementation of these laws will be postponed until they have been fully costed, and
integrated into our medium-term budget framework, and their poverty and social impact
assessed.
16.
We seek to moderately raise the revenue-to-GDP ratio over time to create space for
pressing spending needs. Based on recommendations from the IMF and other donor
organizations we have submitted a proposal to the cabinet for a tax administration reform
strategy to be implemented during 2011-15, with a view to building capacity in tax
administration and contributing to the improvement of the quality of tax administration
services and better collection of budget revenue. This includes an initiative to increase the
number of taxpayers covered by the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate (LTI) by June 2011

48
(benchmark). We have also prepared an initial inventory of existing tax and customs
exemptions, and an assessment of their costs, and submitted to cabinet a proposal for reform
of the exemptions regime. For 2011, we intend to undertake a review of tax policy, with a
view to formulating a strategy for reform of the tax regime (benchmark) and decreasing our
reliance on non-tax revenues. We will be asking the IMF, the World Bank, and other
international financial institutions for technical assistance in these areas.
17.
We are also pursuing steps to further enhance public financial and debt management.
In this context, our public financial management strategy aims at the eventual introduction of
a full Treasury Single Account (TSA) system at the Republican level and implementation of
an electronic financial management information system. We have also adopted in 2010 a law
on internal audit and state financial control. A registry of the gold and precious metals held
by the Ministry of Finance has been completed, and these assets will be transferred to the
NBT balance sheet as part of international reserves before the end of 2010. We are
committed to prudent debt management, and will restrict our external borrowing to loans on
concessional terms. To avoid potential problems vis-à-vis the requirements under the
program, we are strengthening coordination with IMF staff to ensure that an appropriate level
of concessionality is achieved for all new loans.
C. State-Owned Enterprises, Agriculture, and Data
State-Owned Enterprises
18.
We are taking steps to address the problem of arrears in SOEs and put them on a
sound financial footing. Some arrears reflect structural deficits in SOEs, others nonpayment
of dues from government entities. Arrears remain a serious problem that could potentially
jeopardize macroeconomic stability. We seek to address these problems urgently and ensure
that these firms are subject to financial discipline going forward. For the near-term, we have
ensured that the 2011 budget includes sufficient resources for all spending agencies to remain
current on their obligations. Looking ahead, to enhance transparency and highlight any risks
to public finance, we intend to complete a fiscal risk assessment report as part of the draft
2012 budget (benchmark).
19.
The SOE Supervision Unit is making progress to becoming fully operational, with the
help of the European Commission and IMF technical assistance. Hiring and retaining
qualified staff remains difficult, however. The unit has assessed the financial performance of
SOEs for 2009, and their 2010 financial plans. The unit has also prepared and published
reports on SOE performance that are also published on the Ministry of Finance’s website. By
June 2011, all SOE’s subject to review by the SOE unit (Ministry of Finance) will be
required to publish 2010 financial statements and results of external audits conducted in line
with accepted standards of auditing on the Ministry of Finance website. We will be looking
to the international community for technical assistance to support these efforts.

49
20.
Tajikistan Aluminum Company (Talco) has undergone an external audit of its
2006-08 financial statements, and the audit report and the financial statements together with
the audit opinion have been published on the company’s website (benchmark for endDecember 2009). Talco Management Company will soon issue a tender for an external audit
of Talco Management’s 2008 and 2009 financial statements by a reputable international audit
firm (benchmark for end-June 2010).
21.
The second-largest SOE, Barki Tajik, will—with World Bank support—continue
electricity tariff adjustments in order to achieve cost recovery by end-2011. In the meantime,
the government will continue to work with donors to improve the social mitigation
mechanism to ensure that the most vulnerable segments of the population have access to a
basic minimum of energy services. Following up on the external audit of its 2007 accounts,
Barki Tajik will continue to work with the World Bank on improving its financial
management. An improvement in collection of payment arrears will be essential.
22.
For the purpose of disclosure of beneficial ownership of all companies registered with
the Ministry of Finance’s agency for securities, we finalized the database of beneficial
ownership of all companies listed with the agency, and published it on the ministry’s website.
Agriculture
23.
In June 2009 we adopted an action plan to resolve the cotton debt problem, and are
proceeding with its implementation. All farm debt accumulated as of January 1, 2008, and all
interest accrued on that stock since that time has been written off. Certificates legally
discharging farmers from debt obligations to investors were distributed. As part of the action
plan we encouraged all banks to apply the Tajikistan Agricultural Financing Facility
methodology, developed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, for the
government financing scheme for the agriculture sector in 2010. In light of fiscal constraints,
budgetary resources available for lending to the agriculture sector will be limited to resources
that are paid back in 2011, and over the medium-term we will be looking to phase out
budgetary support in this area. A precondition for having a private-sector led financing
mechanism will be the ability to use land-use rights as collateral. We are working closely
with the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and other donors on the implementation of
the action plan. We are also seeking donor financing for the agriculture sector to ensure that
farmers have sufficient access to credit under the new mechanisms being developed. We
hope our recent proposal for financing under Global Agriculture and Food Security Fund
(GAFSP) will receive favorable support from the donor community.
Data
24.
We plan to strengthen our national accounts and price statistics, with technical
assistance from the regional IMF statistics advisor, who will coordinate closely with the
STATCAP project led by the World Bank.

50
25.
We will also continue to strengthen our debt data management framework, including
by completing an inventory of government domestic debt and domestic and external debt of
SOEs. This information will be published, together with a report on government and
government-guaranteed external debt, in the 2011 budget documents. In addition, the NBT
continues to strengthen the monitoring system of private external debt, and began publishing
these data on the NBT website on a semi-annual basis starting as of June 2010—sharing this
data on a quarterly basis with the Ministry of Finance.
IV. PROGRAM MONITORING
26.
We will continue to monitor progress in implementing the program through
quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets, as well as prior actions, and
structural benchmarks set for 2010 and 2011. These are listed in the tables attached to the
letter of intent. The technical memorandum of understanding which is also attached to this
letter defines the quantitative targets of the program and their adjustors, and specifies
reporting requirements. Completion of the fourth review under the ECF arrangement—which
is envisaged for March 15, 2011—will require observance of the quantitative performance
criteria for end-December 2010 and other relevant performance criteria, completion of the
fifth review—which is envisaged for September 15, 2011— will require observance of the
quantitative performance criteria for end-June 2011 and other relevant performance criteria,
and completion of the sixth review—which is envisaged for March 16, 2012— will require
observance of the quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2011 and other
relevant performance criteria.

51
Table 1: NBT Reform Action Plan
Reform

Timing

Status

GOVERNANCE
Close down the Cotton Debt Department at the NBT.

June 2009

Done

Appoint the NBT Board for a fixed term with 3
non-executive members.

June 2010

Done

Establish NBT Board Committees, such as an audit
committee, chaired by a non-executive member of the NBT
Board.

June 2010

Done

Create and publish on the NBT’s website a register of
commercial interests of NBT Board members and top
management

June 2010

Done

Develop proposals to restructure the NBT’ organizational
set up

December 2010

A draft revised central bank law substantially compliant
with the recommendations of Fund staff should be
approved by the President of the Republic and submitted to
Parliament for enactment.

December 2010

AUDITING
External audits of financial accounts for FY ending April
2009 and for the 8 months ending December 31, 2009 to
be completed.

September
2010

Completed

Continue semi-annual NIR reviews by an international audit
firm at test dates under the ECF arrangement. Such
reviews should be completed before the IMF Board
meeting and the TOR for the reviews should be adapted as
needed to ensure that (i) the auditor attends vault counts
on the relevant test date; (ii) emerging issues are
addressed; and (iii) previous recommendations are being
addressed.

Prior action for
the Board
meeting

KPMG completed
end-June NIR
review in July.

Publish on its external website in a dedicated section the
financial statements and audit opinion within 1 month from
completion of the audit, also including all past audit reports.

Continuous

Completed

52

Reform

Timing

Status

Develop an internal regulation to define a formal policy for
the selection and appointment of its external auditor. The
policy should stipulate: (i) the composition of the selection
committee, including participation by non-executive Board
members; (ii) criteria for making the selection; (iii) a timeline
for the tendering, bidding and appointment, ensuring the
contracting of the external audit not later than 3 months
before the year-end; and (iv) multi-year audit contracts.

September
2010

Done

Outsource—through a formal tendering process—to an
external consulting firm the internal audit of the activities of
(i) the international relations department, including foreign
exchange lending and liquidity support; (ii) the domestic
lending and liquidity support activities; and (iii) the
management of foreign currency vault operations at
headquarters. Ensure that external consultant contributes
to capacity building in the Internal Audit Department.

April 2010

Done; an external
consultant
“International
Auditing Company,
Ltd.” was selected.

Plan and organize an external quality assurance review of
the NBT’s Internal Audit Department by certified experts on
its compliance with Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)
standards.

June 2011

ACCOUNTING AND OPERATIONS
Create a new base of the NBT balance sheets and
continuously monitor their conformity with analytical data

June 2009

Keep full records of adjustments made with regard to
audited financial reports, and keep full records to confirm
the data that the IMF publishes in its reports

Continuously

Increase the number of sudden checks of cash available in
the NBT’s head office and regional branches.

Continuously

Develop a mechanism to transfer and share information

Continuously

Recommendations
of special audit of
the NBT and
end-December
2008 NIR audit
incorporated.
Revised balance
sheet presented as
part of regular
annual audit.

53

Reform

Timing

Status

between departments on any reclassification of items in the
NBT’s accounting balance sheet for the purpose of
compiling the monetary analysis.
Establish a register of the gold bars held in the NBT vaults,
including gold owned by the Ministry of Finance. This
register must include details on the serial number of the
gold bars and the ownership. This register must be
included in the scope of the NIR review, starting with the
end-December 2009 test date.

March 2010

Registry of gold
was completed in
August 2010.

Take measures to create a centralized accounting system
of the NBT by transferring all accounting functions to
relevant departments and introduce software for centralized
recording of transactions done by the NBT’s regional
branches.

June 2010

Requesting
technical
assistance

Include the issue of accounting and monitoring of the NBT
balance sheet items in daily meetings of the working group.
Include representatives of the internal audit and accounting
into the working group
Strengthen cash management by setting up basic
structures which assure the segregation of duties between
the front-office, back-office and accounting functions in
order to mitigate operational risks.

54
ATTACHMENT III. TAJIKISTAN: TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
April 19, 2011
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This memorandum defines the quantitative performance criteria and the indicative
targets and relative adjustors, and establishes the content and frequency of the data to be
provided to IMF staff for the program monitoring relating to the program supported by an
arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF)—which replaced the existing
three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement following the entry
into force of the Executive Board’s decision of July 2009—under the request in the
authorities’ Letter of Intent dated April 19, 2011.
II. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
A. Definitions and Concepts
2.
Test dates. Quantitative performance criteria are set semi-annually starting December
31, 2010 through December 31, 2011, and are to be met at the end of each period unless
otherwise specified.
3.
National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT). The NBT is the central bank of the country
responsible for the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. For the purpose of
the program, NBT includes all its central and regional offices.
4.
General government. For the purpose of the program, “general government”
includes the republican government, local (including municipal) governments, and the
agencies included in the administrative classification of the budget. It excludes all other
agencies not specifically listed, including but not limited to Barki Tajik and Talco.
5.
Foreign-financed PIP and related grants. The foreign financed PIP is a program of
investments in infrastructure and social sectors agreed by the general government of
Tajikistan and its donors (including but not limited to international financial organizations).
The program is fully financed by related grants and loans, and does not involve any
additional financing commitment from the general government of Tajikistan. Related grants
are grants provided by the donors financing the PIP for financing of projects included in the
PIP.
6.
Domestic arrears are defined as the general government expenditure that have not
been paid after coming due as determined in the State Budget of the Republic of Tajikistan
and other government documents regulating the execution of the Budget for ten business
days.

55
7.
Concessional and nonconcessional debt. Concessional debt is defined as debt with a
grant element equivalent of 35 percent or more. The grant element of a debt is calculated
using the commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs) plus a margin at the time of its
contracting. For debts of an original maturity of 15 years or more, the average CIRR over the
last 10 years will be used, while the average of CIRRs of the preceding six-month period will
be used to assess the concessionality of debts with original maturities of less than 15 years.
To the 10-year and 6-month averages of CIRRs, the following margins will be added:
0.75 percent for repayment periods of less than 15 years; 1 percent for 15–19 years;
1.15 percent for 20–29 years; and 1.25 percent for 30 and more years. In general, the grant
element is calculated as value of the loan minus present discounted value of future payments
over the loan value (multiplied by 100). Present discounted value is sum of all future
discounted payments (both amortization and interest), where the discount rate corresponds to
the CIRR mentioned above. Nonconcessional debt is defined as debt without a grant element
or with a grant element of less than 35 percent. The debt refers also to commitments
contracted or guaranteed and for which value has not been received. The calculation is
performed by the authorities and verified by the IMF based on the data provided by the
authorities.
8.
Valuation changes (program exchange rates). For program monitoring, U.S.
dollar-denominated components of the general government’s and the NBT’s balance sheets
will be valued at the program exchange rate (SM4.4031 = US$1.00; official exchange rate as
of December 31, 2010). Other foreign currency denominated items will be valued at the
respective cross rates between the program exchange rate of the U.S. dollar and current
official exchange rates of the U.S. dollar against those currencies as of December 31, 2010.
The SDR components will be valued at the program SDR exchange rate SDR = $1.54003
(December 30, 2010). Official gold holdings shall be valued at US$1,410.25 per troy ounce
(December 31, 2010).
B. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets
Quantitative Performance Criterion 1: Ceiling on a cumulative flow of net domestic
assets of the NBT for the year.
9.
Definition. For the purpose of the program, net domestic assets (NDA) of the NBT
are defined as reserve money at program exchange rates minus net foreign assets at program
exchange rates of the NBT. The cumulative flow of NDA for the year is defined as a
difference between end-of-period balances for a period under evaluation and the preceding
end-of-the year balance, unless otherwise specified. Reserve money (RM) at program
exchange rates is composed of currency in circulation (CC), required reserves (RR), other
bank reserves (OBR), and deposits of nongovernmental nonbanks with the NBT (DNGNB).
The value of the net foreign assets at program exchange rates of the NBT is calculated as the
difference between NBT’s claims on nonresidents and its liabilities to nonresidents. The

56
NBT’s NDA comprise the following assets and liabilities: net credit to the general
government, net claims on banks, credit to the economy, and other items net (OIN). OIN
includes the foreign exchange revaluation and capital accounts of the NBT.
10.
Adjustor for changes in reserve requirement ratio. The ceiling on a cumulative
flow of NDA of the NBT for the year will be adjusted upwards (downward) when the
required reserve rates (rr) on deposits in local and/or foreign currency (DB) are increased
(decreased), resulting in a corresponding increase (decrease) of reserve money (RM).
NDA before RR change: NDA=RM-NFA
RM=CC+RR+OBR+DNGNB where:
RR=rr*DB
DB – deposit base
rr – required reserve rate
Define: drr – change of required reserve rate.
DB – deposit base used for calculation of required reserves
drr*DB – amount of upward (if drr>0) or downward (if drr<0) adjustment in RM
NDA after RR change NDA=RM (+/-)drr*DB-NFA.
11.
Adjustor for Ministry of Finance gold holdings. The cumulative NDA flow is
adjusted downward (upward) for any deposit (withdrawal of deposit) of Ministry of
Finance’s gold holdings with the NBT during the program period.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 2: Floor on a cumulative flow for the year of total
net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars).
12.
Definition. Total net international reserves of the NBT are defined as the difference
between total gross international reserves of the NBT and total reserve liabilities of the NBT.
Total gross international reserves of the NBT are defined to include NBT’s holdings of
monetary gold (defined as gold of London good delivery quality), including monetary gold
owned by the Ministry of Finance, SDRs, convertible currencies in cash or in nonresident
financial institutions that are readily available and any reserve position at the IMF. Also
included are holdings of foreign currency-denominated securities issued by governments or
central banks of OECD member states. Excluded are changes in the level of gross foreign
reserves that arise from capital subscriptions in foreign financial institutions, non-liquid
assets of the NBT, convertible currency denominated claims on domestic banks and other
residents, assets in nonconvertible currencies, foreign assets pledged as collateral or

57
otherwise encumbered and the net forward position, if any (defined as the difference between
the face value of foreign currency denominated NBT off balance sheet claims on
nonresidents and foreign currency obligations to both residents and nonresidents). Reserve
liabilities of the NBT are defined as liabilities outstanding to the IMF and liabilities of the
NBT to nonresidents with an original maturity of up to and including one year. A cumulative
flow for the year of total net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) is defined as a
difference between the end-of-period balances for the period under evaluation and the
preceding end-of-the year balance, unless otherwise specified.
13.
Adjustor for conversion of nonmonetary gold into monetary gold. The cumulative
NIR flow will be adjusted upward by the amount of nonmonetary gold held by the NBT that
is converted to monetary gold, and the amount of nonmonetary gold held by the Ministry of
Finance that is converted to monetary gold and transferred to the reserve holdings of the
NBT.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 3: Zero ceiling on new lending and guarantees
from the NBT to private sector (continuous quantitative performance criterion).
14.
Definition. New lending from the NBT to the private sector is defined as loans
extended by the NBT to domestic commercial banks, credit unions, credit associations, and
microfinance organizations with a maturity of more than three months, and loans extended by
the NBT to other domestic nonbank financial institutions or any other domestic entity other
than the general government. Short-term liquidity loans to domestic commercial banks, credit
unions, credit associations, and microfinance organizations with a maturity of up to three
months are not included under this definition. Guarantees are defined as any guarantee
extended by the NBT of principal or debt service payment for debt issued or contracted by
private sector entities.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 4: Floor on the cumulative overall fiscal balance of
the general government excluding foreign-financed PIP and related grants.
15.
Definition. The overall fiscal balance of the general government is defined from
below the line on a cash basis as the negative sum of:
a. the change in net claims on the general government of the NBT: net claims on
the general government of the NBT is defined as the net position of NBT
loans and advances to the general government, NBT holdings of government
securities (excluding treasury bills issued as part of the NBT recapitalization
process), bank restructuring costs, and all deposits of the general government
with the NBT (excluding the Ministry of Finance’s gold holdings),
counterpart deposits (which reflect balance of payments and/or general budget
support from international financial institutions and other donors), and the
privatization account (where proceeds from the privatization of state property
are held);

58
b. the change in net claims on the general government of the rest of the domestic
banking system: net claims on the general government of the rest of the
domestic banking system are defined to include the net position of the general
government with respect to other domestic commercial bank assets (loans,
overdrafts, cash advances, holdings of treasury bills or other securities) and
liabilities (deposits, etc.). Treasury bills issued to commercial banks as part of
the cotton debt resolution are excluded;
c. the change in net claims on the general government of domestic nonbank
institutions and households: net claims on the general government of domestic
nonbank institutions and households are defined as treasury bills, bonds or
other government securities held by nonbank institutions and households
(including nonresidents and nonresident financial institutions), plus any other
liabilities of the general government to domestic nonbank institutions or
households;
d. the change in net foreign liabilities of the general government: net foreign
liabilities of the general government are defined as government debt to foreign
sovereigns, and foreign financial and nonfinancial institutions. For this
purpose, net foreign liabilities exclude liabilities that arose in the context of
the externally financed PIP;
e. gross proceeds from the privatization of state property: gross proceeds from
the privatization of state property are defined as all receipts originating from
the sale of the general government property; and
f. the change in gross arrears of the general government: gross arrears refer to
domestic or external arrears.
All changes will be calculated as the difference between end-of-period stocks, net of any
valuation changes resulting from currency movements.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 5: Ceiling on general government wage and
pension arrears (continuous quantitative performance criterion).
16.
Definition. Arrears on general government and pensioners’ pensions are defined as
any shortfall in monthly disbursements of wages and pensions. These payments are defined
as overdue if they have come due at the end of the month and remain unpaid for ten business
days thereafter. To allow monitoring of the above defined arrears the government will
provide data on actual wage payments, including a breakdown by local governments, as part
of the monthly budget execution statements submitted to the IMF staff. The Agency on
Social Protection and Pensions will provide quarterly reports and statements of their
operations.

59
Quantitative Performance Criterion 6: Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of any
nonconcessional external debt (continuous quantitative performance criterion).
17.
Definition. The definition of debt, for the purposes of the program, is set out in
Executive Board Decision No. 12274, Point 9, as revised on August 31, 2009 (Decision No.
14416–(09/91); see below) and also includes commitments contracted or guaranteed and for
which value has not been received. The debt limits apply to short-, medium-, and long-term
debt contracted by the general government of Tajikistan, the National Bank of Tajikistan, and
any other agency acting on behalf of the government, including but not limited to
state-owned banks and state-owned enterprises that can issue external debt without a
government guarantee.
18.
The definition of debt set forth in point No. 9 of the guidelines as revised on
August 31, 2009 reads as follows: “(a) For the purpose of this guideline, the term “debt”
will be understood to mean a current, i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a
contractual arrangement through the provision of value in the form of assets (including
currency) or services, and which requires the obligor to make one or more payments in the
form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future point(s) in time; these
payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities incurred under the contract.
Debts can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as follows: (i) loans, i.e., advances
of money to the obligor by the lender made on the basis of an undertaking that the obligor
will repay the funds in the future (including deposits, bonds, debentures, commercial loans
and buyers’ credits) and temporary exchanges of assets that are equivalent to fully
collateralized loans under which the obligor is required to repay the funds, and usually pay
interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future (such as repurchase
agreements and official swap arrangements); (ii) suppliers’ credits, i.e., contracts where the
supplier permits the obligor to defer payments until some time after the date on which the
goods are delivered or services are provided; and (iii) leases, i.e., arrangements under which
property is provided which the lessee has the right to use for one or more specified period(s)
of time that are usually shorter than the total expected service life of the property, while the
lessor retains the title to the property. For the purpose of the guideline, the debt is the present
value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments expected to be made during the
period of the agreement excluding those payments that cover the operation, repair or
maintenance of the property. (b) Under the definition of debt set out in point 9 (a) above,
arrears, penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from the failure to make payment
under a contractual obligation that constitutes debt are debt. Failure to make payment on an
obligation that is not considered debt under this definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will
not give rise to debt.”
19.
External debt limits apply to the contracting or guaranteeing of new
nonconcessional short-term external debt (with an original maturity of up to and including
one year), and to the contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional medium- and
long-term external debt (with original maturities of more than one year).

60
20.
Exclusions from the external debt limits. Loans contracted for debt rescheduling or
refinancing if the terms of the new loan are more favorable will be excluded from the debt
limits. IMF credit is excluded from the external debt limits. The rollover of the existing
guarantees will be excluded from the debt limits. If pledged reserves of the NBT were to be
securitized, these amounts will also be excluded from the debt limits. The performance
criterion on new nonconcessional short-term external debt will not apply to loans classified
as international reserve liabilities of the NBT (liabilities of the NBT to nonresidents with an
original maturity of up to and including one year). Normal import-related financing is
excluded from the criterion.
21.
Valuation of debt denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Debts
falling within the external debt limits that are denominated in currencies other than the U.S.
dollar shall be valued in U.S. dollars at the exchange rate prevailing at the time the
contracting or guaranteeing takes place or at the exchange rate stipulated in the contract.
22.
Guarantee of a debt. For the purposes of the program, the guarantee of a debt arises
from any explicit legal obligation of the general government or the NBT or any other agency
acting on behalf of the general government to service such a debt in the event of nonpayment
by the debtor (involving payments in cash or in kind), or indirectly through any other
obligation of the general government or the NBT or any other agency acting on behalf of the
general government to finance a shortfall incurred by the debtors.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 7: Ceiling on disbursements of concessional
external financing.
23.
Definition: Disbursements of concessional external financing are defined as
disbursements of debt with a grant element equivalent of 35 percent or more.
Quantitative Performance Criterion 8: New external payments arrears (continuous
quantitative performance criterion).
24.
Definition. External payments arrears are defined as overdue payments (principal or
interest) on external debt contracted, guaranteed, or converted into interstate debt by the
general government of Tajikistan or the NBT 30 days beyond the due date and/or applicable
the grace period. This definition excludes arrears on debt subject to rescheduling.
Indicative Target 1: Floor on tax collections.
25.
Definition. Tax collections are defined to include all taxes (and custom revenues)
collected under the general government budget. Regarding internal taxation, the definition
excludes any proceeds from loans, or other banking system credits, the issuance of securities,
or from the sale of state assets. Custom revenues are defined to include customs duties and
other taxes (including VAT) on international trade and transactions.

61
Indicative Target 2: Floor on social- and poverty-related expenditure.
26.
Definition. Social- and poverty-related expenditure is defined as the sum of current
and capital expenditures in the education, health, and social protection sectors as shown in
the functional classification of the budget.
Indicative Target 3: Ceiling on gross equity sales and contributions for Roghun.
27.
Definitions. “Gross equity sales” are defined as all sales of equity in the Roghun
OJSC. “Contributions” are defined as all other transfers to Roghun OJSC, the government, or
any other public entity for the construction of Roghun, with the exception of direct budget
transfers. For purposes of the quarterly indicative target, gross equity sales and contributions
will be measured as the difference between the end-of-period balance for the period under
evaluation and the preceding end-of-the year balance in all accounts of Roghun OJSC with
commercial banks and the NBT, and balances held by the government with commercial
banks or the NBT on account of Roghun OJSC, plus the cumulative withdrawals from these
accounts for expenditure purposes.
Indicative Target 4: Ceiling on the stock of NBT liquidity loans.
28.
Definition. NBT liquidity loans are defined as short-term liquidity loans by the NBT
to domestic commercial banks, credit unions, credit associations, and microfinance
organizations with a maturity of up to three months. For the purpose of the quarterly
indicative target, the stock of liquidity loans will be calculated as the average of the endmonth stock for the three months during the period under evaluation.
III. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE PROGRAM
29.
For program monitoring, the following data should be reported to the Middle East and
Central Asia Department of the International Monetary Fund via the IMF Resident
Representative’s office in Dushanbe.

62
Table 1. Data reporting frequency for program monitoring
Data

Frequency

Lag
3 working
days
3 working
days

1. NBT analytical balance sheet

Weekly

2. NBT balance sheet

Weekly

3. Commercial banks' and Kredit Invest balance sheets

Monthly

4 weeks

4. Auction results for NBT certificates and treasury bills

Weekly

1 week

5. Fiscal revenues, expenditures and financing of budget execution, and
extrabudgetary funds

Monthly

4 weeks

6. Reports and statements from the Agency on Social Protection and
Pensions

Quarterly

6 weeks

7. Arrears of budget entities and state-owned enterprises

Quarterly

4 weeks

8. Wage and pension arrears by all levels of governments

Monthly

4 weeks

9. Stocks, disbursements, guarantees, new contracts of external debt
including terms and disbursement profile, including nonguaranteed
external debt of state-owned enterprises

Quarterly

4 weeks

10. External arrears arising in respect of obligations incurred directly,
guaranteed, or converted into interstate debt by the general government
of Tajikistan or the NBT, including penalties or interest charges

Monthly

4 weeks

11. Liquidity loans and loans stemming from fulfillment of the
lender-of-last-resort function extended by the NBT to the economic
agents in Tajikistan (financial sector, nonfinancial sector, enterprises,
individuals, and any other) specifying date of issue, amount of original
loan, interest, term, schedule of repayment, currency, and any grace
period

Weekly

1 week

12. Net and gross international reserves, including Ministry of Finance
gold holdings, daily sales and purchases of foreign currency, and daily
sales and purchases of foreign currency executed with an intention of
influencing the exchange rate of somoni

Daily

1 working
day

Monthly

4 weeks

13. Foreign exchange spending of Roghun OJSC, total expenditures of
Roghun OJSC, government transfers to Roghun OJSC, equity
subscriptions by the public to Roghun OJSC, any other receipt of Roghun
OJSC. Balances in all accounts of Roghun OJSC with commercial banks
and the NBT and balances held by the government with commercial
banks or the NBT on account of Roghun OJSC. Cumulative number of
shares sold by denomination.

63
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, Fourth Review Under the Three–
Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Waiver of
Nonobservance for Performance Criteria and Modification of Performance Criterion,
and Request for Waivers of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria Resulting in
Noncomplying Disbursements
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by David Owen and Dhaneshwar Ghura

April 26, 2011

Contents

Page

I.

Relations with the Fund ...................................................................................................... 64

II.

The JMAP Bank-Fund Matrix ............................................................................................ 68

III.

Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................. 72

64
I. RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of February 28, 2011)
I.

Membership Status: Joined April 27, 1993; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

% Quota
100.00
100.00
0.00

SDR million
82.08
69.81

% Allocation
100
85.04

SDR million
65.27

% Quota
75.02

SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

SDR million
87.00
87.00
0.00

Outstanding Purchases and Loans
ECF Arrangements

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements
Approval
Expiration
Amount Approved Amount Drawn
Type
Date
Date
(SDR million)
(SDR million)
1
ECF
Apr 21, 2009
Apr 20, 2012
104.40
65.27
ECF
Dec 11, 2002
Feb 10, 2006
65.00
65.00
ECF
Jun 24, 1998
Dec 24, 2001
100.30
78.28

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund2
2011

Principal
Charges/Interest
1
2

0.04

2012
0.22

Forthcoming
2013

2014

2015

0.22

2.61
0.22

7.83
0.2

Formerly PRGF.

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such
arrears will be shown in this section.

65
0.04
0.22
Total
VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
Not Applicable

0.22

2.83

8.04

VIII. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI):
I. MDRI-eligible debt (SDR Million)3
Financed by: MDRI Trust
Remaining HIPC resources

69.31
69.31
--

II. Debt Relief by Facility (SDR Million)
Delivery Date
January 2006
IX.

Eligible Debt
GRA
PRGT
N/A
69.31

Total
69.31

Safeguards Assessment

An update safeguards assessment of the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT)—conducted in
December 2009—noted that initial steps have been taken to address the risks identified by
the special audit on cotton sector financing. However, considerable safeguards risks at the
NBT remain. Both the accounting and the organizational structures are still fragmented, with
no oversight over external and internal audits. Internal audit is weak and needs to increase
coverage of core functions.
To address these issues, the NBT has implemented a number of initial steps: audited financial
statements for end-April 2009 and end-December 2009 were published on the NBT website;
an external auditor was reappointed for a multi-year term starting from FY2010; NIR reviews
at test dates are being conducted every six months; and the internal audit of core functions
was recently outsourced.
X.

Exchange Rate Arrangements

Since June 2009, the exchange rate regime is classified as stabilized. The official exchange
rate is based on all interbank transactions in foreign exchange. It is calculated and announced
daily.

3

The MDRI provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries that qualified for the assistance.
Grant assistance from the MDRI Trust and HIPC resources provide debt relief to cover the full stock of debt
owed to the Fund as of end-2004 that remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief.

66
With effect from December 9, 2004, the Republic of Tajikistan accepted the obligations of
Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of Agreement. The Republic of Tajikistan
maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and
transfers for current international transactions, except for exchange restrictions maintained
for security reasons that have been notified to the Fund pursuant to Executive Board decision
No. 144–(52/51).
XI.

FSAP Participation

Tajikistan participated in the Financial Sector Assessment Program during 2007–08, and the
FSSA report has been published at http://www.imf.org/external/country/TJK/index.htm.
XII.

Article IV Consultation

The 2009 Article IV consultation was completed on Apr 21, 2009.
XIII. Resident Representative
Mr. Aisen, Resident Representative of the Fund, started his assignment in Dushanbe in
July 2010.
XIV. Technical Assistance
The following list summarizes the technical assistance provided by the Fund to Tajikistan
since 2004.
Fiscal Affairs:
July 2004

Revenue Administration Reform

December 2004

Poverty and Social Impact Analysis

June 2005

Public Financial Management

August 2005

Tax Policy and Administration

August 2006

Fiscal ROSC

May 2007

Public Financial Management (Budget Classification)

February/July 2010

Tax Policy and Administration

June 2010

Public Financial Management Reforms

November 2010

Public Financial Management (Regional Advisor)

Monetary and Financial Systems:

67
May 2006

Strengthening the Monetary Policy Framework and Liquidity
Management

October/December 2009 and
September 2010

NBT Recapitalization Strategy

January 2011

Improving Accounting Controls at NBT

Statistics:
April 2004

Data ROSC

October 2004

General Data Dissemination System (GDDS)

June 2006

Report on Monetary and Financial Statistics
National accounts and price statistics (Regional Advisor)

March 2011

BOP

Legal:
January 2004

Tax Legislation

May 2004

Tax Legislation

2006

AML/CFT

October 2010

NBT Law

68
II. THE JMAP BANK-FUND MATRIX
(As of March 31, 2011)
Title

Products and Brief
Description (pillars)

Provisional Timing of
Missions

Expected Date of
Delivery

A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
Bank Work Program
in next 12 months

PDPG 5
 Protecting delivery of basic
services within a sustainable
fiscal framework
 Improving the environment
for private sector
development and growth
 Strengthening government
effectiveness

Identification/Pre-appraisal
November 2010
Appraisal April 2011

Private Sector Development
Dialogue

PSD TA support (Doing
Business) ongoing since 2008
until June 2011

Rural Investment Climate Study
(with DFID TF)
Governance

Field work starts April 2011
Institutional and Governance
Review–development of
analytical work

Board June 2011
Disbursement: July
2011

December 2011

Supporting demand-side
governance–Governance
Partnership Facility funded
by DFID–Bank executed TF
2011–13
Agriculture
Expand farmland restructuring
to enable more rural people to
become independent

Supervision of Land
Registration and Cadastral
System Project
March 2011
September 2011

Project closing
March 2012

Build productive assets of rural
communities in selected
mountain watersheds

Supervision of Community
Agriculture and Watershed
Management Project
March 2011
September 2011

Project closing April
2011, to be extended
to end 2012

69

Increase domestic food
production and reduce the loss
of livestock to help at least
55,000 poorest households

Supervision of Emergency
Food Security and Seed
Imports Project (with Russian
Trust Fund)
March 2011
September 2011

Project closing
March 2013

Improve the livelihood of
cotton farmers and create the
conditions for sustainable
growth of cotton production

Supervision of Cotton Sector
Recovery Project
October 20–November 12,
2009
April 2011
September 2011

Project closing
March 2013

Water: Second project,
Dushanbe water supply

Appraisal: April 2011

Infrastructure
Supporting infrastructure
rehabilitation and improvement
in selected municipalities

Supervision of the Municipal
Infrastructure project–April
2011

Energy—emergency operation
to provide electricity during the
cold period from alternative
(commercial) sources

Supervision of Energy Loss
Reduction Project (with
additional financing for
emergency operation)
April 2011
September 2011

Conducting assessment studies
for the Roghun HPP project

Contract award–February
2011

Social safety nets

Social assistance and
preparation of options for
targeting
Appraisal–April 2011

May 2011

Supporting improving equitable
allocation of resources and
efficiency in health sector
provision

Supervision mission in April
and September 2011 for
Community and Basic Health
Project

Closing Dec 31, 2012

Education

Fast Track Initiative–third

Project closing in
August 2011–likely
to be extended

Health

70
grant, starting April 2010
Supervision–March 2011

Education Modernization
(incl. Additional Financing)
Supervision–October, March
and September 2011
Financial Sector

FIRST TA consultant mission
on bank insolvency law and
secured transactions reform
(law and registry)
August 2010
WB missions to initiate
FIRST TAs: March 2011
WB missions to monitor
FIRST TAs and
implementation of
government-approved FSD
action plan: May 2011

Migration

IDF grant to support
improvement of M&E works
in the migration service under
the government of Tajikistan
May 2011

Mining

IDF grant to support mining
sector study and reforms and
possibility of Tajikistan
joining EITI
September 2011

Fund work program
in next 12 months

- Fifth ECF review
- Tax Policy TA
- Sixth ECF review

Fund request to Bank

- Follow-up on Barki Tajik
audit
- Electricity tariff increases
- Roghun feasibility study
- Cotton/agriculture sector
reforms
- Any STATCAP work on NA

- September 2011
- April 2011
- February 2012

B. Requests for work program inputs

- November 2011
- May-June 2011
- April 2012

71
and inflation statistics
- PFM work
- Social spending
- Financial sector work

Bank request to Fund

-Provide BOP/fiscal data for
updating macro database
-Assessment Letter for PDPG 5

May 2011 (tentative)

C. Agreement on joint products and missions (as needed)
Joint products in next
12 months

Low Income Debt
Sustainability Analysis

February 2012

April 2012

72
III. STATISTICAL ISSUES
(As of March 31, 2011)
Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
30.
General: Data provision has some shortcomings in the areas of national accounts,
price statistics, and monetary statistics, but is broadly adequate for surveillance.
31.
National accounts and price statistics: There are significant deficiencies in the
statistical techniques for national accounts and price statistics, most notably in procedures to
estimate the informal economy, and the techniques for imputation, replacement, quality
adjustment, and introduction of new products in the price indices. Technical assistance from
the World Bank and the Fund has recently focused on the quarterly calculations of GDP by
expenditure and sectors, a framework for reconciling the two approaches, and the
improvement of accuracy of the annual estimates. As regards to price statistics, the most
important general issue is the further implementation of the system of prices and volumes,
instead of presently used comparable volumes.
32.
Government finance statistics: Government finance statistics (GFS) are based on
cash transactions as recommended in the 1986 Manual on Government Finance Statistics.
There are no plans to migrate the basis of compilation to the 2001 Government Finance
Statistics Manual. In 2010, the authorities introduced an administrative classification of the
budget. However, there are occasional budget classification issues within the economic
classification of expenditures and the classification of above- and below-the-line
transactions, which are being resolved with the help of a regional advisor.
33.
Monetary and financial statistics: The safeguard assessment in 2010 concluded that
the accounting function at the NBT is still fragmented and needs to be strengthened. These
risks are mitigated by the statutory audits of the financial statements and the ongoing
semiannual NIR reviews by external audit firms. The authorities have yet not adopted the
latest methodology for the compilation of monetary statistics and reporting of monetary data
through the standardized report forms introduced to all IMF member countries in 2004. Thus,
the monetary data published in International Financial Statistics are outdated with respect to
the methodology and timeliness as well.
34.
Balance of payments: There is a need for consistency in applying the residency
concept in the balance of payments and the national accounts, and the scope of the foreign
trade data needs to be improved to cover the shuttle trade.
Data Standards and Quality
35.
Tajikistan began participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) on
November 17, 2004. Metadata is updated regularly. The authorities have indicated their
interest in graduating from the GDDS to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard

73
(SDDS). They have appointed a national SDDS coordinator and requested technical
assistance for this purpose.
36.

Data ROSC was published on March 30, 2005.

Reporting to STA
Country page in the International Financial Statistics (IFS) has been published since February
2003.

74

Tajikistan: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of March 31, 2011)
Memo Items:
Date of latest
observation

Frequency
of
reporting6

Frequency
of
publication

Data Quality –
Methodological
soundness7

Data Quality –
Accuracy and
reliability8

O, O, LO O

LO, O, O, O, NO

Exchange Rates

03/25/11

03/29/11

D

W

W

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary
Authorities1

03/25/11

03/29/11

D

W

W

Reserve/Base Money

03/18/11

03/29/11

W

M

W

Broad Money

01/31/11

03/16/11

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

03/18/11

03/29/11

W

M

W

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

01/31/11

03/15/11

M

M

M

Interest Rates2

Feb /11

03/29/11

M

M

V

Feb/11

03/28/11

M

M

M

LO, LO, LNO, O

LO, LO, LO, O,
O

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3—General
Government4

Jan/11

03/30/11

M

M

M

LO, LO, O, O

O, O, O, LO, LO

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3—Central
Government

Jan/11

03/30/11

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and
Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

Q4/10

01/25/11

Q

Q

V

Q3/10

01/25/11

Q

Q

V

LNO, LNO, O,
O

LO, O, O, O, O

Q4/10

01/2511

Q

Q

V

Feb/11

03/28/11

M/A

M

V

O, LNO, LNO,
LNO

LO, LO, LNO,
O, O

Q4/10

01/25/11

Q

Q

V

Consumer Price Index

External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods
GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt5
1

Date
received

Frequency
of
data6

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered, as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, and rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government comprises central government (budgetary, extra budgetary, and social protection funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); NA: Not Available.
7
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published in April 2005 and based on the findings of the staff mission during April 2004 for the
dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions,
scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed
(NO).
8
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source
data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.
2
3

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
Debt Sustainability Analysis Under the Debt Sustainability Framework for
Low Income Countries
Prepared by the Staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
Approved by David Owen and Daneshwar Ghura (IMF) and
Jeffrey D. Lewis and Yvonne Tsikata (World Bank)
April 26, 2011
Based on the external low income country (LIC) debt sustainability analysis (DSA),
Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress remains high.1Under the baseline scenario, external debt
burden indicators in present value terms remain below their respective indicative thresholds,
with the exception of the debt-to-exports ratio. Stress tests within the public DSA demonstrate
the sensitivity of the fiscal position with respect to a slightly lower long run growth rate and
the necessity of the assumed fiscal consolidation. The DSA results thus underscore the need
for: i) the planned fiscal consolidation; ii) caution in contracting new debt; and iii) careful
cost-benefit assessment of large-scale investment projects, to make sure that external
resources are used productively. Furthermore, a one-off increase in the government’s debt
obligations, e.g. related to existing contingent liabilities, would push the debt-to-GDP ratio
higher, but would not put the country on an unsustainable debt path in the long run. Sound
macroeconomic policies and acceleration of structural reforms would also be needed to
strengthen Tajikistan’s growth potential and safeguard external stability.
I. BACKGROUND
1.
While declining significantly over the last decade, Tajikistan’s debt burden
remains high. Tajikistan’s external debt2 to GDP ratio decreased from slightly over
100 percent in 2000 to about 34½ percent in 2010. A debt-for-equity swap with Russia in
2004 reduced considerably the debt burden and tilted the composition of debt toward
multilaterals. Against the backdrop of a sharp increase in loans from China since 2007, the
share of bilateral creditors picked up rapidly. As of end-2010, Tajikistan’s external debt is
1

The DSA has been produced jointly by World Bank and IMF staff, in consultation with Asian Development
Bank staff. It updates the last DSA of May 2010 presented in the IMF Staff Report for the First and Second
Review under the Extended Credit Facility (EBS/10/95, 05/24/2010). The fiscal year for Tajikistan is January
1–December 31.
2

Tajikistan’s public and publicly guaranteed external debt covers the general government and both guaranteed
and non-guaranteed debt of SOEs (state-owned enterprises).

2
largely concessional and held in broadly equal parts between multilateral and bilateral
creditors, with the share of China quite prominent at about 38 percent. The share of
commercial creditors is small.3
2.
Domestic debt has constituted a very small part of overall public debt owing to
low primary fiscal deficits (excluding the externally financed public investment
program) and a shallow government securities market. Domestic debt represented about
2 percent of GDP (6 percent of total public debt) at end-2010, consisting mostly of
nontradable government securities held by the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT). Since
2009, the government has undertaken regular issuance of Treasury-bills (T-bills), but only in
small amounts, with short maturity, and at rates below the current NBT refinancing rate.4
Moreover, eight-year government bonds were issued to commercial banks in 2010 as part of
the cotton debt resolution with rollover provisions and an interest rate of only 2 percent.
3.
The present value (PV) of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt at
end-2010 was higher than projected in the last DSA, mainly on account of higher
external borrowing. PPG external debt came to about 34½ percent of GDP at
end-2010—roughly 2½ percent of GDP higher than projected in the last DSA update.
The current DSA concludes that Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress remains high
(see Figure 1).5 The PV of PPG external debt to exports of goods and services stood at
147 percent at end-2010, significantly above its threshold, and prolonged breaches of the
threshold throughout the projection period are anticipated. Other debt burden indicators are
projected to remain below their respective thresholds under the baseline scenario. In
Tajikistan, remittance inflows have become the most prominent source of foreign exchange
earnings through a dramatic structural increase from less than 10 percent of GDP in 2003 to
4.

3

In addition, the authorities accumulated a trivial amount of arrears, which are not taken into account in this
DSA as they do not have any macroeconomic impact. External payments arrears were accumulated in 2010 on
two loans guaranteed by the government. For the first loan, arrears reached a maximum of Euro 103,032
(US$148,428) during the course of the year. Original payment arrears were cleared by end-August 2010, and
penalty interest was cleared by end-December. For the second loan, arrears of US$216 was cleared in January
2011.

4
5

In 2010, the total level of issuance was less than 0.3 percent of GDP.

According to the latest three-year average of the World Bank’s CPIA rating (2007–09) of 3.2, Tajikistan’s
policies and institutions are assessed as those corresponding to a “weak performer.”Three-year average of CPIA
ratings is used according to recently issued joint Bank-Fund Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the joint
Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Framework (October 2008). These guidelines aim at a less volatile assessment
of risk than that based on a single latest CPIA rating. The thresholds for the debt burden for weak performers
are 100, 30 and 200 for the NPV of debt to exports, GDP and revenue respectively; debt service thresholds are
15 and 25 percent of exports and revenue, respectively. In the scenarios that include remittances, the thresholds
have been revised downward by 10 percent so the corresponding threshold for NPV of debt and debt service to
exports and remittances is 90 percent and is 13½ respectively.

3
almost 40 percent in 2010 (after posting a pre-global crisis peak of 49 percent of GDP in
2008). However, projected prolonged breaches of the original threshold for the NPV of
debt-to-exports ratio under the baseline scenario and stress tests preclude the incorporation of
remittances in the debt sustainability assessment.6 If debt burden indicators incorporating
remittances in the denominator are used, Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress would likely be
reduced to medium (see Figure 2).
II. UNDERLYING DSA ASSUMPTIONS
5.
The macroeconomic framework over the medium term is broadly comparable to
the one presented in the last DSA and is described in more detail in Box 1.







Tajikistan’s underlying growth potential is projected to be about 5 percent, broadly
comparable to the last DSA. Real GDP growth in 2010 turned out stronger than projected
at 6½ percent, supported by robust growth in remittances and a pickup in manufacturing
and construction.
On account of anticipated terms of trade shocks in 2011 and 2012, a modest depreciation
of the real effective exchange rate is incorporated, which would help bring the current
account balance towards its estimated medium-term norm.7
Medium- and long-term projections for growth in nondebt creating flows are comparable
to the last DSA (see Table 1a).
Underlying assumptions for the fiscal projections are that the government budget deficit
(excluding Public Investment Program) of about 1 percent of GDP in 2011 will be
eliminated in the medium term and beyond. This seems feasible based on current
spending plans and revenue projections.

6

Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Framework for Low
Income Countries (Jan 25, 2010 available from http://www.imf.org/external/pp/longres.aspx?id=4419)
identifies the maximum permissible length of the breach of the thresholds as 10 years starting from the current
period, i.e., half of the projection period.

7

Based on the Methodology for the Consultative Group on Exchange Rate Issues (CGER) Exchange Rate
Assessments (November 8, 2010 available from http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2006/110806.pdf).

4

Box 1. Tajikistan: Macroeconomic Assumptions
Real GDP growth is projected at 5¾ percent in 2011, and at 5 percent beyond 2011. These figures are
significantly below their ten-year historical average of 8 percent (2001–10). The historical output trajectory was
supported by fast growth in the aftermath of the civil war, a sharp structural increase in remittances during
2004–08, and a benign global environment for the most part of the historical base. Expected long-term growth
will be driven primarily by exports once investment in the energy sector is completed and structural reforms
trigger a more dynamic private sector. The U.S. dollar GDP deflator is projected to increase from 6 percent in
2010 to 12 percent in 2011, but expected to decelerate to about 3 percent through 2031 reflecting progress
toward a low-inflation environment while assuming no commodity price shocks beyond the medium term.
Export of goods and services is expected to pick up to an average of 9 percent during 2011–16, despite a
projected sharp deceleration in 2012 on account of an anticipated adverse shock to cotton prices. Expansion in
nontraditional agriculture sectors and increase in energy exports would support this growth. An average growth
rate of about 7¾ percent is projected for 2016–31 as export will be supported by completion of the infrastructure
projects in the energy sector and progress with structural reforms, including in the agriculture sector and
improvement in the business environment.
The external current account posted a surplus of 2¼ percent of GDP in 2010. However, the improvement is
expected to be temporary with the current account reverting to a deficit of 3¾ percent of GDP in 2011 in light of
anticipated adverse terms of trade shocks (higher food and fuel prices), the full year impact of Russian export
duties on fuel (imposed in May 2010), and the reversal of the one-off factors that curbed imports in
2010 (intermittent blockade of rail transit during the first half of 2010 and a slowdown in external disbursements
for the Public Investment Program). A projected significant drop in cotton prices in 2012 would add to the
balance of payments pressures. Reflecting these adverse shocks, a modest depreciation of the real effective
exchange rate that would help bring the current account balance close to its medium-term norm is factored in.
During 2012–15 external borrowing on concessional terms to finance the construction of Roghun HPP is
incorporated. Owing to its high import content, the current account deficit is expected to rise temporarily to a
range of 6–7 percent of GDP. Beyond the medium term, the current account balance is expected to improve
gradually. Reserve coverage is projected to build up gradually to about 3¼ months of imports by 2031.
Fiscal policy is assumed to aim for an overall balance (excluding the externally financed public investment
program) over the medium term and beyond, after modest deficits in 2009–11.
External assistance. Official external loan financing on concessional terms is estimated to decline from
4¾ percent of GDP in 2011 to 2¾ percent of GDP through 2031. The grant element of new external debt is
assumed to decline slightly to 31 percent from 35 percent over the projection horizon.
Public domestic debt. A modest increase in domestic debt to GDP ratio is assumed from about 2 percent to
5½ percent by 2017 and gradually declining to 4 percent by 2031.
Real interest rates. For domestic debt, it is expected that real interest rate becomes slightly positive starting
2016.

5
III. EXTERNAL DSA
A. Baseline
6.
Under the baseline scenario, only one of Tajikistan’s external debt burden
indicators, the PV of debt-to-exports ratio, is projected to breach the indicative
policy-dependent thresholds significantly and for a protracted period of time (see
Figure 1 and Table 1a). The debt-to-exports ratio will peak at 178 percent in 2015, exceeding
the threshold of 100 percent significantly. After that, it is projected to decrease gradually
throughout 2031. However, during the entire projection period the threshold will be breached
by a wide margin.
7.
External debt service ratios are expected to stay below their thresholds over the
entire period. During the projection period, debt service payments continue to be
manageable, albeit spiking during the years when principal payments on loans from China
fall due. As a result, from 2016 to 2019, the debt service-to-export trajectory approaches the
indicative threshold. It is assumed that all of Tajikistan’s external public and publicly
guaranteed debt is contracted on concessional terms.
B. Alternative Scenarios and Stress Tests
8.
Under the historical scenario, the debt burden indicators are significantly lower
than under the baseline scenario. The historical scenario is based on averages from 2001 to
2010,8 during which the current account deficit was relatively low—at below 3 percent of
GDP, and growth was much stronger. Therefore, under this scenario, all debt burden
ratios—excluding the PV of debt-to-exports ratio—remain well below the baseline trajectory
and follow a downward trend throughout the projection period.
9.
A high-investment low-growth scenario underscores the risk to debt
sustainability if growth dividends are less than projected (see Table 1b). The scenario
demonstrates that, starting in 2012, when growth is reduced by half due to
lower-than-expected productivity of investments, all ratios deteriorate notably, with the ratio
of the PV of debt-to-GDP approaching its sustainability threshold by the end of projection
period. The ratio of the PV of debt-to-exports deteriorates even further. Nevertheless, the
growth projections under the baseline are already cautious and no significant growth impact
from the completion of Roghun HPP and other energy projects are incorporated.
Consequently, a high-investment low-growth scenario may prove pessimistic.

8

For exports and noninterest current account averages for only 2006–10 were used due to a break in the export
series reflecting a change in the treatment of exports of aluminum in the current account. For all others, the
usual ten-year historical average was applied.

6
10.
A scenario assuming contracting external debt on less favorable terms would
lead to a significant deterioration of Tajikistan’s external debt indicators compared to
the baseline scenario. If all new borrowing were to be contracted on less favorable terms
during the projection period, Tajikistan’s PV of debt-to-export ratio would rise substantially.
Specifically, with the increase in the average interest rate on new disbursements by
2 percentage points, the PV of debt-to-GDP ratio would rise continuously and breach the
threshold starting in 2030, and the PV of debt-to-exports ratio would increase further from
levels projected under the baseline and stay above the threshold.
11.
Bound tests show that adverse macroeconomic shocks would also have a
profound negative impact on Tajikistan’s external position. In the event of a shock to
nondebt creating inflows, all ratios, except debt service-to-revenues, exceed the indicative
policy-dependent thresholds by a significant margin and almost all of them remain above the
thresholds throughout the projection period.
IV. PUBLIC DSA
12.
The baseline trajectory in the public sector DSA is very similar to the trajectory
in of the external DSA, given that public sector domestic debt is small. The most extreme
stress test is embodied in a lower long run growth compared to the baseline. In other words, a
growth rate 0.5 percentage points smaller compared to the one assumed in the baseline would
result in ever-increasing trajectories of all solvency and liquidity debt burden measures in the
public template. This stress reflects the sensitivity of fiscal sustainability to the underlying
growth assumption. Another important stress test in the public sector DSA includes the
impact of the government facing a contingent liability notionally equal to 10 percent of
GDP.9 In this scenario, the PV of debt-to-GDP ratio peaks at 40 in 2015, indicating
considerable risks to debt sustainability from contingent fiscal liabilities. Under low growth
and/or fixed primary balance scenarios public debt is unsustainable (see Figure 3). This
highlights the importance of relying fully on concessional financing and risks associated with
diverging from the fiscal consolidation assumed in the baseline scenario.
V. DEBT DISTRESS CLASSIFICATION AND CONCLUSIONS
13.
The current DSA concludes that Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress remains high.
The PV of PPG external debt to exports of goods and services breaches the indicative
threshold significantly throughout the projection period. Other debt burden indicators are
projected to remain below their respective thresholds under the baseline scenario.

9

Possible contingent fiscal liabilities stem from nonperforming loans in the financial system and arrears (tax
and inter-enterprise) in the state enterprises. The figure of 10 percent of GDP is notional, but likely represents
an outer bound for potential fiscal costs.

7
14.
The results of the alternative scenarios and stress tests indicate that the debt
sustainability situation could further deteriorate. A modestly lower long run growth rate,
borrowing on less favorable terms of financing or absence of a fiscal consolidation could
result in an unsustainable debt burden trajectory. The DSA results thus underscore the need
for fiscal consolidation and extreme caution in contracting new debt and to carefully vet
large-scale investment projects, to make sure that external resources are used productively.
Sound macroeconomic policies and acceleration of structural reforms would also be essential
for maintaining debt sustainability by strengthening Tajikistan’s growth potential and
safeguarding external stability. Going forward, continued emphasis should also be placed on
strengthening debt management capacity by closely monitoring the debts of the state-owned
enterprises (SOEs), assessing potential contingent liabilities arising from the financial sector
and quasi-fiscal activities of SOEs. The mission highly recommended the authorities to
undertake the Debt Management and Performance Assessment (DEMPA) to identify and
address weaknesses in various aspects of Tajikistan’s debt management institutions and
practices.
15.
The authorities concurred with the conclusions of the DSA exercise. The External
Debt Unit at the Ministry of Finance has received technical assistance to improve the
in-house capacity for debt sustainability assessment. The authorities’ results were in
agreement with the staff findings. In response to the authorities’ request, a World Bank
DEMPA mission will take place during April 14–24, 2011. Staff welcomed the authorities’
voluntary and swift action in this area that will help facilitate assessment of the strengths and
weaknesses in debt management and design of actionable reform plans to improve debt
management capacity.

8
Figure 1. Tajikistan: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed
External Debt under Alternatives Scenarios, 2011 - 2031 1/
4.5

Grant element of new borrowing (%

40

4.0

35

3.5

30

3.0

25

2.5
2.0
1.5

15

20

0.5

5
0
2011

2016

2021

2026

40
30

1.0
0.0

50

20

10

2031

Rate of debt accumulation

b. PV of debt-to GDP ratio

60

10
0
-10
2011

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

2016

2021

2026

2031

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

d. PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

c. PV of debt-to-exports ratio

400

300

350

250

300

200

250
200

150

150

100

100

50

50
0

0
-50
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

-50
2011

e. Debt service-to-exports ratio

20

2016

2021

2026

2031

f. Debt service-to-revenue
30

18
16

25

14
20

12
10

15

8
10

6
4

5

2
0

0
2011

2016
Baseline

2021

2026
Historical scenario

2031

2011

2016

2021

Most extreme shock 1/

2026

2031

Threshold

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2021. In all figures it
corresponds to a nondebt creating flows shock.

9

Figure 2. Tajikistan: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External
Debt under Alternatives Scenarios Incorporating Remittances, 2011 - 2031 1/
a. Debt accumulation

4.5

b. PV of debt-to-GDP+remittances

40 60

4.0

35

3.5

30

3.0

25

2.5

50
40

20 30

2.0
1.5

15 20

1.0

10

0.5

5

0.0

0

10
0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

Rate of debt accumulation
2011

250

2016

2021

2026

2031

c. PV of debt-to-exports+remittances

d. PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

300
250

200

200

150
150

100

100

50
0

16

50

2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

e. Debt service-to-exports+remittances

14

0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

f . Debt service-to-revenue ratio

30
25

12
20

10
8

15

6

10

4

5

2
0

0
2011

2016
Baseline

2021

2026
Historical scenario

2031

2011

2016

2021

Most extreme shock 1/

2026

2031

Threshold

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2021. In all figures it
corresponds to a nondebt creating flows shock.

10
Figure 3. Tajikistan: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2011 - 2031 1/

Baseline

Fix primary balance

Contingent liability

Growth LT

90

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

450

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

35
30

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio

25
20
15
10
5
0
2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2021.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Table 1a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2008-2030 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

Standard
Deviation

Projections

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2011-2016
Average

2021

2031

149.5 130.3 113.6
123.4 105.6
91.8
... -19.2 -16.7
...
-6.2 -17.0
-1.4
-0.8
-0.9
1.9
10.8
10.8
89.0
71.1
66.8
90.9
82.0
77.6
-4.0 -10.7 -12.0
-4.0
-8.4
-8.2
0.7
-1.0
0.3
-2.5
-0.9
-3.0
...
-4.5 -13.1
... -13.0
0.3
...
-1.4
1.9

81.5
64.3
-32.1
-26.6
-3.4
10.1
63.4
73.5
-14.6
-7.9
1.2
-2.0
-21.2
-5.5
0.0

57.4
43.9
-24.1
-29.6
1.0
11.6
58.4
70.0
-11.4
-3.3
0.8
-13.1
-17.6
5.5
-0.6

52.6
40.5
-4.9
-6.5
-0.2
25.8
27.0
52.8
-27.5
-3.5
1.5
-2.4
-4.0
1.7
0.0

44.0
34.2
-8.6
-8.9
0.5
34.2
23.3
57.5
-35.0
-2.9
1.3
-2.3
-7.0
0.3
0.0

41.2
34.0
-2.8
-6.3
6.8
48.2
20.7
68.8
-41.9
-1.8
0.6
-4.3
-8.8
3.5
0.0

46.5
29.4
5.4
-9.6
6.4
55.3
16.8
72.1
-48.7
-3.1
-0.2
-5.8
-10.2
14.9
0.0

53.5
35.9
7.0
7.0
4.5
39.3
15.2
54.5
-34.8
-2.4
0.0
-0.3
2.9
0.0
-0.3

53.8
34.6
0.2
-9.2
-3.4
34.9
17.2
52.1
-38.3
-2.2
0.0
-0.9
-5.0
9.5
0.0

49.4
32.1
-4.3
-0.4
2.5
38.1
18.3
56.4
-35.3
-1.8
-0.3
-1.6
-1.4
-3.9
0.0

49.8
33.3
0.4
2.4
6.0
39.1
15.4
54.4
-32.9
-1.1
-0.2
-2.4
-1.1
-2.0
0.0

50.9
34.0
1.0
1.1
5.2
37.0
14.5
51.5
-31.6
-0.8
-0.2
-3.0
-1.2
0.0
0.0

50.6
33.5
-0.2
0.6
4.8
35.8
14.1
49.8
-30.7
-0.7
-0.3
-3.0
-1.2
-0.9
0.0

50.0
32.8
-0.6
0.7
4.8
34.7
13.5
48.2
-29.6
-0.3
-0.3
-3.0
-1.2
-1.3
0.0

47.4
30.5
-2.6
-1.4
3.3
32.1
12.9
45.1
-28.6
-0.3
-0.3
-3.5
-1.2
-1.1
0.0

49.7
32.7
-1.1
0.5
4.4
36.1
14.8
50.9
-31.4
-0.8
-0.2
-2.8
-1.2
-1.5
0.0

41.4
29.2
-1.3
-2.7
2.3
28.9
13.8
42.8
-26.2
-0.1
-0.4
-4.0
-1.1
1.4
0.0

32.3
26.4
-0.6
-0.5
2.4
24.3
12.5
36.8
-21.6
-0.1
-0.4
-2.0
-0.9
-0.1
0.0

38.8
28.3
-1.0
-2.0
2.3
27.5
13.4
40.9
-24.8
-0.1
-0.4
-3.3
-1.0
1.0
0.0

41.7
227.7
24.4
133.3
117.8
9.0
5.4
4.8
0.2
6.9

41.4
269.4
24.9
162.0
119.1
13.0
8.9
6.5
0.4
5.6

41.9
288.2
25.0
172.1
119.3
15.0
10.6
7.4
0.4
4.2

41.7
296.6
24.5
174.4
116.4
15.5
10.9
7.2
0.4
5.1

41.1
304.8
23.9
177.6
113.1
15.6
10.8
6.9
0.4
5.5

39.4
304.7
22.5
174.0
106.0
16.6
11.7
7.1
0.2
5.8

41.2
281.9
24.2
165.5
115.3
14.1
9.7
6.7
0.3
5.5

34.0
246.3
21.8
157.9
102.7
14.0
10.5
6.8
0.0
3.6

25.6
205.7
19.7
158.4
92.8
11.2
9.3
5.5
0.7
3.0

31.6
235.9
21.1
158.2
99.5
13.5
10.4
6.6
0.2
3.3

5.8
14.5
2.7
28.9
31.0
34.8
20.7
0.2
3.1
61.9

5.0
8.2
2.4
-4.7
9.7
34.8
20.9
0.3
3.6
48.0

5.0
7.6
2.4
7.0
7.0
35.5
21.0
0.3
3.2
47.5

5.0
6.2
2.4
7.9
7.9
33.8
21.1
0.2
2.2
45.1

5.0
6.7
2.4
7.5
8.3
34.9
21.1
0.2
1.9
43.4

5.0
6.7
2.4
7.6
4.9
22.9
21.2
0.1
1.0
39.4

5.1
8.3
2.4
9.0
11.5
32.8
21.0
0.2
2.5
47.6

5.0
2.9
2.3
7.7
6.7
30.8
21.2
0.2
1.4
42.9

5.0
2.9
2.0
6.6
7.5
31.0
21.2
0.4
1.4
43.4

5.0
2.8
2.2
7.7
6.5
31.0
21.2
0.3
1.4
42.9

6.8
21.1
1.6
3.4

7.8
13.6
1.9
4.0

8.8
13.0
2.1
3.4

9.8
11.5
2.4
2.4

11.0
12.1
2.6
2.3

12.3
12.1
2.7
1.3

17.8
8.1
3.8
1.5

38.7
8.1
7.5
1.5

2001

...
...
...
...
...
6.6
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
13.5
...
...
...
18.4

...
...
...
...
...
13.3
10.4
41.5
...
15.8

...
...
...
...
...
11.2
8.2
30.5
...
28.8

...
...
...
...
...
28.1
25.9
87.6
0.1
25.1

...
...
...
...
...
17.3
14.5
20.3
0.0
4.7

...
...
...
...
...
32.7
26.8
33.0
0.2
9.0

...
...
...
...
...
13.2
8.8
8.9
0.2
9.7

...
...
...
...
...
15.1
14.2
11.7
0.2
1.1

...
44.3
... 258.0
...
25.2
... 146.6
... 120.8
26.6
12.0
21.3
7.9
16.2
6.5
0.4
-0.1
-2.5
-3.7

8.3
-15.8
2.4
18.4
18.4
14.0
0.0
...
...

10.2
-1.8
4.9
-13.5
-2.5
...
15.5
0.0
...
...

9.1
6.2
4.2
8.8
9.7
...
16.7
0.0
...
...

10.2
17.9
5.7
23.2
22.9
...
17.0
0.0
...
...

10.6
20.6
4.6
22.9
27.1
...
17.3
0.0
...
...

6.7
4.5
3.7
-48.4
-15.9
...
19.3
0.0
...
...

7.0
13.7
5.5
5.2
32.5
...
18.9
0.1
...
...

7.8
22.5
5.5
16.8
57.9
...
20.5
0.1
...
...

7.9
28.2
4.1
12.8
45.0
...
20.5
0.1
...
...

3.9
-6.6
3.0
-12.7
-26.7
...
20.0
0.2
...
...

6.5
6.3
2.8
28.4
8.3
...
20.9
0.1
...
...

1.0
...

1.0
8.2

1.2
15.8

1.6
29.9

2.1
33.3

2.3
11.5

2.8
21.7

3.7
32.0

5.1
38.3

5.0
-3.0

5.6
13.2
1.4

1.1

3.7

-27.5

14.3

-3.5

3.8

2017-2031
Average

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

8.0
11.1
4.4
10.1
15.8
...

2.1
11.2
1.0
15.2
26.5
...

0

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

13.9
2.8

8.0
1.5

11

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Historical
Average

2002

2000

12

Table 1b.Tajikistan: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-2031
(In percent)
Projections
2014
2015

2011

2012

2013

2016 2021

2031

24

25

25

25

24

23

22

20

24
24
23

19
26
26

15
28
28

12
28
29

9
28
29

7
27
28

3
29
30

-2
30
31

24
24
24
24
24
24

24
24
26
40
33
33

24
26
28
54
41
34

24
25
28
51
40
33

23
25
27
49
38
32

22
23
26
45
35
30

21
22
25
39
32
30

19
20
23
25
23
27

133

162

172

174

178

174

158

158

133
133
128

123
170
177

106
191
201

85
201
213

66
211
221

52
209
222

23
210
224

-15
242
258

133
133
133
133
133
133

157
160
157
260
199
157

168
205
168
371
273
168

171
208
171
366
271
171

174
211
174
361
270
174

170
207
170
350
262
170

155
186
155
282
219
155

156
182
156
200
175
156

118

119

119

116

113

106

103

93

118
118
113

90
125
126

74
132
134

57
134
137

42
134
135

32
127
130

15
137
141

-9
142
145

118
118
118
118
118
118

115
116
125
191
158
160

114
123
136
258
197
161

112
121
133
244
189
158

109
117
129
230
179
153

102
109
121
213
167
143

99
105
118
183
148
140

90
93
106
117
107
126

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-2031 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-2031 /2
A3. Alternative Scenario : High investment-low growth
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-2031 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-2031 /2
A3. Alternative Scenario : High investment-low growth
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-2031 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-2031 /2
A3. Alternative Scenario : High investment-low growth
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

13

Table 1b.Tajikistan: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-2031 (continued)
(In percent)
Projections
2014
2015

2011

2012

2013

2016

2021

2031

5

9

11

11

11

12

10

9

5
5
5

8
8
9

8
10
11

7
11
11

7
12
12

6
12
12

2
13
13

0
15
16

5
5
5
5
5
5

8
8
8
8
8
8

10
11
10
12
10
10

10
12
10
14
12
10

10
12
10
14
12
10

10
12
10
14
12
10

9
11
9
19
14
9

9
11
9
14
12
9

5

7

7

7

7

7

7

5

5
5
4

6
6
6

6
7
7

5
7
7

4
7
7

4
7
7

2
8
8

0
9
9

5
5
5
5
5
5

6
6
7
6
6
8

7
7
8
8
8
9

7
7
8
9
8
9

6
6
7
9
8
9

6
6
7
8
7
8

6
6
7
12
10
8

5
6
6
8
7
8

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-2031 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-2031 /2
A3. Alternative Scenario : High investment-low growth
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-2031 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-2031 /2
A3. Alternative Scenario : High investment-low growth
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitely assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

Table 2a. Tajikistan: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2009-2031
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2011-16
2016
Average

2021

2031

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

36.6
35.9

36.7
34.6

34.2
32.1

35.5
33.3

37.3
34.0

37.6
33.5

37.5
32.8

35.6
30.5

34.2
29.2

29.8
26.4

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Residual, including asset changes

6.4
7.7
4.7
23.4
3.4
28.1
3.0
-1.1
4.1
-0.1
-1.3

0.1
-1.0
3.1
23.2
2.3
26.2
-5.2
-2.3
-2.9
1.1
1.0

-2.4
-0.1
4.8
22.8
2.1
27.6
-4.8
-2.3
-2.6
-0.1
-2.3

1.3
-0.5
3.6
22.4
1.5
26.0
-4.0
-2.0
-2.0
0.0
1.7

1.8
-1.1
2.8
22.2
1.3
25.0
-3.8
-2.0
-1.8
0.0
2.8

0.3
-1.6
1.9
21.9
0.8
23.8
-3.5
-2.1
-1.4
0.0
1.9

-0.1
-1.9
1.7
21.7
0.6
23.4
-3.5
-2.1
-1.4
0.0
1.8

-1.9
-1.4
2.2
21.8
0.6
24.0
-3.6
-2.2
-1.4
0.0
-0.5

-0.3
0.3
2.3
21.8
0.6
24.1
-2.0
-1.8
...
0.0
-0.6

-0.5
-2.4
-0.6
21.8
0.6
21.2
-1.8
-1.5
...
0.0
1.9

Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

0.7
0.0
...
5.4
3.2
3.7
…
3.0
3.5
-1.6

27.2
25.2
25.2
3.7
117.6
130.5
120.8
2.8
3.1
3.0

26.5
24.4
24.4
5.4
116.0
127.8
117.8
2.7
3.0
7.2

27.0
24.9
24.9
4.1
120.6
129.5
119.1
2.2
2.3
2.3

28.3
25.0
25.0
3.3
127.3
135.0
119.3
2.3
2.4
1.0

28.6
24.5
24.5
2.5
130.7
135.9
116.4
2.6
2.7
1.7

28.6
23.9
23.9
2.3
131.5
135.0
113.1
2.9
3.0
1.8

27.6
22.5
22.5
2.8
126.4
129.8
106.0
2.9
3.0
4.1

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

3.9
2.1
-2.4
14.6
12.7
0.1
...

6.5
1.9
0.9
-8.7
12.5
0.0
...

5.8
1.8
-10.5
-7.9
18.6
0.1
34.8

5.0
1.4
-8.3
...
15.8
0.0
34.8

5.0
1.4
-6.6
...
13.6
0.0
35.5

5.0
1.4
-5.0
...
11.0
0.0
33.8

5.0
1.5
-4.7
...
11.0
0.0
34.9

5.0
1.4
-4.6
...
11.0
0.1
22.9

2.4

2017-31
Average

2.0

PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

14

Other S ustainability Indicators
26.8 23.1
21.8 19.7
21.8 19.7
3.0
-0.1
122.9 105.8
126.3 108.7
102.7 92.8
3.1
2.7
3.2
2.8
2.6
-0.2

5.0
1.4
-5.9
...
12.5
0.0
32.4

5.0
1.5
0.2

5.0
1.5
0.3

5.0
1.5
0.2

...

...

...

6.0
0.1
30.8

6.0
-0.1
31.0

6.0
0.0
...

15

Table 2b. Tajikistan: Sensativity Analisys for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2011-2031
Projections
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2021 2031
PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

26

27

28

29

29

28

27

23

26
26
26
26

24
28
27
37

24
32
29
38

23
35
30
39

22
38
30
39

20
40
30
38

15
53
34
38

11
85
48
36

26
26
26
26

27
28
26
36

27
31
27
36

27
31
26
36

27
31
26
35

25
30
24
34

23
29
19
32

15
26
6
29

116

121

127

131

131

126

123

106

116
116
116
116

109
126
122
165

107
142
130
173

105
159
135
178

102
175
138
179

93
182
136
175

69
242
153
175

53
391
219
166

116
116
116
116

119
124
116
163

123
137
121
163

125
141
121
163

123
142
118
160

117
137
109
154

104
134
87
147

67
119
28
132

3

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

3
3
3
3

2
2
2
2

1
3
2
10

0
5
3
10

0
7
3
10

0
10
4
10

0
16
6
9

0
33
14
10

3
3
3
3
3

2
2
2
3
2

2
3
2
3
10

2
4
2
4
10

2
5
2
4
10

2
5
1
4
10

1
4
0
5
9

-1
4
-6
6
10

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative scenario: Contingent liability
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative scenario: Contingent liability
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative scenario: Contingent liability
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/60
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 25, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation and
Fourth Review Under the ECF Arrangement with Tajikistan
On May 11, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the 2011 Article IV consultation and fourth review under the Extended Credit
Facility (ECF) arrangement with Tajikistan.1
Background
Tajikistan has begun to recover from the global crisis, which negatively affected inward
remittances, exports of such key products as aluminum and cotton, and foreign direct
investment. In 2010, real GDP growth reached 6.5 percent, up from 3.9 percent in 2009,
despite rail traffic disruptions in the first half of the year. Stronger hydroelectricity
production helped to boost industrial activity, while trade and services benefited from a
recovery of remittances in line with the economic rebound in Russia. However, in
response to increased international food and fuel prices in the second half of the year,
headline inflation accelerated to 9.8 percent by end-2010. Despite the pick-up in
remittances, which are normally associated with higher imports, the trade balance
improved and the external current account shifted to a surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP in
2010, compared with an average 5 percent deficit during 2005–09. The lagged impact of
real exchange rate depreciation, disruptions to rail transit in the first part of 2010, and a
slowdown in external loan disbursements for the public investment program
underpinned this shift. The overall balance of payments remained positive.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summing up
can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

76

The government achieved an overall fiscal deficit (excluding externally financed
investment) of 0.4 percent of GDP, compared with a budgeted deficit of 1 percent of
GDP, mainly on account of lower than projected current spending, particularly on
wages. The National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) continued targeting reserve money
growth, while limiting interventions in the foreign exchange market to smoothing excess
volatility and building reserves. At end-2010, gross international reserves reached
US$447 million, equivalent to 1.4 month of imports. However, liquidity support from the
NBT to commercial banks started to rise sharply in the second half of 2010 and into
2011–partly to finance imports of food and fuel products for strategic reserves—
increasing the risk of compromising monetary policy targets going forward and reflecting
continued weaknesses in the banking sector.
Economic prospects for 2011 are good, but not without risks. Growth is projected to
reach at least 5.8 percent, in line with the continued growth of key regional partners.
Prospects for cotton are also relatively good given high international prices for this
commodity. However, continued increases in future food and energy prices are likely to
fuel inflation and aggravate poverty. Further disruptions in rail traffic—one of the key
import and export arteries for landlocked Tajikistan—could weigh on growth. Remaining
vulnerabilities in the financial and state enterprise sectors could also pose a quasi-fiscal
risk and be a drag on private sector growth.
Tajikistan’s financial system remains vulnerable, despite recent improvements in some
financial soundness indicators. Although private sector credit (excluding activities
related to the write-off of loans held by Kredit Invest as part of the cotton sector debt
resolution) recovered through the course of the year and classified loans have recently
declined, the extent to which this reflects a lasting improvement is uncertain. Profitability
turned positive in the fourth quarter, but remains minimal. Recent gains appear fragile,
and linked to restructuring of assets rather than an underlying improvement in
profitability.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors considered that Tajikistan’s economic performance has been
generally satisfactory and that economic growth is gaining momentum. Directors agreed
that the most pressing challenge for policymakers is to support the recovery, while
addressing risks to macroeconomic stability from rising commodity prices and worsening
terms of trade. They also noted that, over the medium term, sustained economic growth
and poverty reduction hinge on additional efforts to strengthen the fiscal position,
provide buffers against shocks, and promote market oriented reforms.
Directors commended the authorities for the commitment to fiscal discipline shown
under the program and considered this year’s fiscal plans appropriate. They noted,
however, the importance of budgetary consolidation over the medium term to safeguard

77
debt sustainability. Along the fiscal adjustment path, greater room for needed social and
infrastructure spending calls for revenue-enhancing measures and a better balance
between current and capital expenditure.
Directors agreed that monetary policymakers should address emerging inflation risks
without undermining the recovery. Curbing liquidity lending by the central bank would be
an important step in the right direction. Directors also encouraged the authorities to
develop over the medium term a framework for direct cash support to the poor as a
more targeted response to surges in international commodity prices and imported
inflation.
Directors observed that, despite some improvement in financial indicators, the banking
system remains fragile and financial intermediation limited. They cautioned that fiscal
liabilities might emerge if weaknesses at banks are not addressed. In this regard,
Directors urged the authorities to press ahead with their strategy to tackle these
vulnerabilities and reduce financial sector dependence on direct liquidity support.
Directors agreed that structural reforms, including to improve governance and the
business environment, should remain a top policy priority. They welcomed progress in
establishing a framework for agricultural financing, and encouraged the authorities to
continue cooperating with donors to push these reforms forward. Directors also
welcomed plans to improve the business climate through a reform of the tax regime and
improved transparency and accountability at state-owned enterprises.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

78

Republic of Tajikistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–11
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Act.

Act.

Act.

Act.

Proj.

Production and prices
Real GDP

(Annual change in percent)
7.8

7.9

3.9

6.5

5.8

13.2

20.4

6.5

6.5

13.9

Total Revenue and grants

22.5

22.1

23.4

23.2

22.8

Of which: grants

2.0

1.6

3.4

2.3

2.1

27.7

27.6

28.8

26.9

28.2

CPI inflation (period average)
General Government

Expenditure and net lending

(In percent of GDP)

Of which: social expenditure 1/

7.5

7.3

9.0

9.0

9.2

Of which: capital expenditure 2/

14.1

13.6

13.3

10.9

12.2

Overall balance
Excluding externally financed investment

2.5

1.4

-0.5

-0.4

-1.0

Including externally financed investment

-5.3

-5.5

-5.4

-3.7

-5.4

Monetary Indicators
Broad money
Velocity of broad money (end-of-period)
External sector

(Annual change in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
78.8

6.3

39.6

26.2

22.1

4.7

5.8

5.1

4.9

5.0

(In millions of U.S. dollar, unless otherwise indicated)

Exports of goods and services

767

865

755

970

1,250

Imports of goods and services

2,555

3,703

2,714

2,940

3,851

-319

-392

-295

123

-253

-8.6

-7.6

-5.9

2.2

-3.7

85

150

278

447

557

0.3

0.7

1.2

1.4

1.6

Current account balance
In percent of GDP
Gross official reserves 3/
In months of next year's imports 4/
Sources: Tajik authorities; and IMF staff projections.

1/ Includes current and capital spending on social protection, education and health.
2/ Includes domestically and externally financed investments.
3/ Gross reserves are net of the pledged deposits of the NBT; includes SDR 81.2 million allocation in Q3 2009.
4/ Excludes electricity, which is on barter basis, and imports for projects financed with loans from China.

79
Statement by Mr. Weber and Ms. Zavkiev on Tajikistan
May 11, 2011
1. On behalf of our Tajik authorities, we thank the staff for the constructive policy
discussions and valuable support in pursuing the objectives of the Fund arrangement. The
authorities remain strongly committed to a close relationship with the Fund, acknowledging
the importance of financial and technical assistance for preserving macroeconomic stability
and implementing a broad reform agenda that is also supported by the international donor
community. They ask the Executive Board to favorably consider their request as outlined in
the Letter of Intent and to agree to the completion of this review under the ECF.
2.
Tajikistan remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, a situation exacerbated by the
country’s geography with limited options for road and rail transport. Achieving energy
reliability and food security are predominant concerns. Despite notable progress in
establishing stronger foundations for growth, the Tajik government continues to grapple with
the challenges related to a narrow export base, banking sector weaknesses, the dependence
on remittance inflows, and poverty and unemployment. It strives to remedy inefficiencies in
infrastructure investment and in the state enterprise sector. The authorities concur with the
staff’s appraisal with a view to addressing these issues.
3.
Tajikistan has adhered to all of the program’s performance criteria, with the exception
of the continuous criterion on the accumulation of new external arrears. The authorities very
much regret that a breach occurred and they acknowledge that the two incidences constitute a
misreporting. They have, however, acted promptly in clearing these arrears and in taking
credible remedial action, as recognized by staff. They appreciate the staff’s conclusion that
the arrears were so small as to have no material impact on the assessment of program
performance or on debt sustainability, and that they can thus be handled on a de minimis
basis. The authorities kindly ask the Board for a waiver for nonobservance of this criterion.
4.
Most of the program’s quantitative indicative targets were also met. Liquidity lending
to banks by the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) above the ceiling was to a substantial
extent a response to the sudden increase in the price of imported food and fuel aimed at
ensuring sufficient supply. This measure stabilized markets and sought to prevent public
unrest. However, the authorities are aware of potential stability and fiscal risks of such
lending and they expect to scale it down in conformity with the targets under the program.
The floor on social expenditure was undershot due to concerns to meet the overall fiscal
target, an outcome that helped prevent fueling a wage-price spiral. The increase in public
wages and salaries for 2010 was contained at 10 percent rather than reaching the envisaged
15 percent, which contributed to lower social spending than anticipated. Tajikistan has met
all structural benchmarks and structural reforms to improve transparency and governance
progressed well.
5.
The Fund arrangement has proved an effective policy framework to maintain
macroeconomic stability and advance structural reforms. The economy has emerged from the

80
effects of the global financial crisis and is expected to grow by close to 6 percent in 2011.
Given Tajikistan’s external vulnerabilities, the flexible exchange rate has served as an
important shock absorber and has allowed for the accumulation of significant reserves. The
authorities concur with staff that the current account surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP seems to
be transitory.
6.
The monetary authorities have achieved single digit inflation but the inflation rate is
projected to rise again above 12 percent in 2011 due to the recent upward trend of
international prices for food and fuel. Monetary policy will continue to target reserve money
as the nominal anchor with the focus on containing inflation, while maintaining the flexible
exchange rate regime. The authorities will further enhance the transparency and governance
of the NBT, including NBT recapitalization, in line with the recommendations of last year’s
safeguards assessment.
7.
Fiscal discipline has been maintained with an overall fiscal deficit of 0.4 percent of
GDP, below the 1 percent of GDP envisaged under the program. Given the need to meet
pressing social and development needs with limited resources, a budget deficit of 1 percent
of GDP is targeted for 2011. This target does not jeopardize debt sustainability by keeping
public and publicly-guaranteed debt below the ceiling of 40 percent of GDP. External
borrowing will be restricted to concessional loans.
8.
In the area of public financial management, the reform agenda encompasses a review of
tax policy, for which Fund assistance has been requested, and improvements in tax
administration. This agenda includes increasing the number of taxpayers covered by the
Large Taxpayer Inspectorate, introducing a full Treasury Single Account system at the
national level, and implementing an electronic financial management information system.
Further measures are envisaged, as a matter of priority, to address arrears problems in SOEs
in order to put them on a sound financial footing and ensure their transparency and
governance. These steps will include the publication of the externally audited financial
statements of large SOEs such as Tajikistan Aluminum Company (TALCO) and Tajik
Electricity Company Barki Tojik. The audit report of Roghun OJSC will be finalized and
released by end-June, as included in the structural benchmarks. The new SOE Unit at the
Ministry of Finance will closely monitor the financial situation of the SOEs going forward.
9.
Tajikistan’s economic policy and development strategy over the medium-term focuses
on safeguarding macroeconomic stability, developing the country’s comparative advantage in
hydroelectricity power production, accelerating structural reforms, and supporting the
vulnerable segments of society. The authorities intend to further strengthen the governance
and transparency of public sector institutions and enterprises and enhance the role of the
private sector. They are committed to protect social spending from expenditure cuts and to
develop a more targeted and effective system of social transfers with the help of the World
Bank.

