September 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/296

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

July 23, 2010
May 18, 2010

July 7, 2010
2010

July 23, 2010
January 29, 2001

South Africa: 2010 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for South Africa
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2010 Article IV consultation with South Africa, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2010 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 18, 2010, with the officials of South Africa on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on June 23, 2010. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.



A staff supplement on the Debt Sustainability Analysis.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 7, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.



A statement by the Executive Director for South Africa.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOUTH AFRICA
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with South Africa
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and Aasim Husain
June 23, 2010



Discussions: May 5–18, 2010, with Ministers Gordhan (Finance),
Manuel (Planning) and Patel (Economic Development), Governor
Marcus, other senior government officials as well as labor and private
sector representatives.



Staff: Messrs. Selassie (Head), Ramcharan and Zhan and Mmes. Aydin
and Stuart (SPR). Mr. Cuevas, the Senior Resident Representative, also
took part in the discussions.



Focus: The macroeconomic policy mix to sustain the on-going recovery
and structural reforms needed to raise potential growth.



Previous Article IV: Directors found South Africa to be weathering the
immediate effects of the global financial crisis well on account of its
sound macroeconomic framework, underpinned by consistent and
transparent frameworks, the floating exchange rate regime, and a well
supervised financial system.



Exchange system: The South African rand floats against other
currencies. The exchange rate system is free of restrictions on the making
of payments and transfers for current international transactions.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................4
II. Navigating The Near-Term Policy Challenges .....................................................................5
A. Recent Developments and Outlook...........................................................................5
B. Ensuring Fiscal Sustainability ...................................................................................7
C. Monetary Policy: Staying Ahead of the Curve .......................................................10
III. Raising Potential Growth ...................................................................................................15
A. Unemployment ........................................................................................................15
B. Other Structural Policies .........................................................................................17
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................18
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2008-15 ........................................................26
2. National Government Main Budget, 2007/08-2012/13 .......................................................27
3. Nonfinancial Public Sector Operations. 2007/08-2012/13 ..................................................28
4. Balance of Payments, 2008-15 ............................................................................................29
5. Monetary Survey, 2005-09 ..................................................................................................30
6. Indicators of Vulnerability, 2005-09....................................................................................31
7. Financial Soundness Inidcators, 2005-10 ............................................................................32
8. Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2008 ......................................................................33
Figures
1. Real Sector Developments ...................................................................................................22
2. Exchange Rate, Asset Prices and Spreads ...........................................................................23
3. Monetary Developments and Interest Rates ........................................................................24
4. Monetary Developments and Interest Rates ........................................................................25
Boxes
1. Exchange Rate Assessment..................................................................................................13
2. The South African Financial Sector After the Crisis ...........................................................21

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background: Along some key dimensions, the global financial crisis had a much more
pronounced impact on South Africa relative to some other large emerging markets. Notably,
the contraction in South African economic activity in 2009, while smaller than those
advanced countries at the epicenter of the crisis, was still larger than in much of emerging
Asia, and Latin America. The scale of job shedding in South Africa was also among the
highest in the G20. Playing off strongly counter-cyclical policies and the global recovery,
economic activity is now rebounding. Recent events in the Euro Area have caused portfolio
inflows to abate, the local stock market to wobble, and the rand to weaken somewhat against
the U.S. dollar.
Challenges: The overriding economic policy challenge is reducing unemployment and
inequality through higher economic growth. On the macroeconomic front, this requires fiscal
and monetary policies that will sustain the ongoing recovery while gradually shifting to a
more neutral stance so as economic recovery takes hold. Second, because the likely growth
path under current policies is only going to have a limited impact on unemployment, there is
a need for reforms to improve the efficiency of labor and product markets.
Authorities’ views: Fiscal policy has been cast with an eye to supporting the recovery while
gradually rebuilding policy buffers. If revenues over perform on account of higher growth in
2010 and beyond, they might use some of the additional resources on priority spending areas.
Monetary policy has been eased fairly aggressively, and with the recovery taking hold and
inflation expectations on the high side the room for further rate cuts has likely narrowed. The
authorities feel that greater reserves accumulation would be useful in addressing the
challenges from large capital flows, but also emphasized that these challenges are best dealt
within a multilateral context. Unemployment is a key policy focus, and a wage subsidy aimed
at younger unskilled workers, as well as other policy options are under discussion.
Staff views: Staff broadly concur with the authorities’ approach, and believe that the current
fiscal plan strikes the right balance between supporting the recovery through sustained
infrastructure investment while ensuring fiscal sustainability. To avoid any procyclical bias
in fiscal policy however, recurrent spending growth should adhere to the 2–3 percent real
growth target outlined in the budget. Spending growth, particularly on wages, which has
accounted for much of the recent growth in recurrent spending, should be benchmarked to
productivity gains. The monetary policy stance has been appropriate, and with risks evenly
poised, the scope for further rate cuts seems limited. There is more scope to increase
international reserves further. More pressing still are policies to engender higher economic
growth. The various government initiatives to enhance the competitiveness of selected
industries can be usefully complemented with reforms to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of labor and product markets.

4
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
South Africa’s economic performance since the mid-1990s has been strong.
Economic growth picked-up quite perceptibly
6
South African Growth Path
during this period against the backdrop of vastly
5
3-year moving average
improved macroeconomic policy management.
4
Tax collections improved allowing the fiscal
3
deficit to decline and fiscal policy to be managed
2
in a relatively counter-cyclical manner during the
1
5-year average
upswing. This in turn allowed public debt to be
0
reduced from 48 percent of GDP in 1995 to 28
-1
percent in 2007. International reserves have been -2
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
increased from a mere US$8 billion in 2003 to
Source: South Africa Reserve Bank
close to US$42 billion in May 2010.

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

2.
The result was a fairly robust macroeconomic position on the eve of the global
financial crisis. And while the economy slipped into recession in the wake of the crisis, there
was ample room to ease monetary and fiscal policy aggressively and avoid an even deeper
contraction.
3.
But this strong overall performance is blemished by the difficulty encountered in
reducing the high unemployment level. Moreover, the recession worsened the
unemployment picture considerably, with close to 1 million jobs lost since end–2008. As of
March 2010, unemployment stood at some 25 percent. This contributes to the rather high
level of income inequality.
4.
Now as South Africa navigates its way out of its first recession since 1992 it faces
two challenges.


Sustaining the incipient recovery. After contracting by 1¾ percent in 2009, South
Africa’s economy has turned the corner and is expected to expand by around 3¼ percent
in 2010 (Table 1). The focus in the coming months accordingly needs to be on sustaining
the recovery while recalibrating policies amidst the ebb and flow of portfolio flows and
uncertain global economic prospects



Raising potential growth. The growth rates considered most probable under a baseline
scenario (4–4½ percent over the medium-term) are highly unlikely to quickly reverse the
sharp cyclical increase in unemployment much less make in-roads into reducing the high
structural unemployment level. That would instead require growth rates in the range of
6 percent. And this in turn would require major changes to the incentives facing firms and
employees.

5

II. NAVIGATING THE NEAR-TERM POLICY CHALLENGES
A. Recent Developments and Outlook
5.
Playing off strongly counter-cyclical policies and the global recovery, economic
activity is rebounding. The economy contracted for three consecutive quarters beginning in
2008Q4, a period during which close to 1 million jobs was lost. Economic activity has since
expanded by 0.9 and, 3.2 percent in 2009Q3 and 2009Q4 respectively. And growth
accelerated further still to 4.6 percent in the first quarter of 2010 (Figure 1). The recovery
most recently has been led by a rebound in activity in the export-oriented and interestsensitive sectors—mining, manufacturing, and financial services. From the demand side,
private consumption growth remains anemic, reflecting high levels of indebtedness, and with
ample unutilized capacity, investment growth is also weak. Still, the recovery looks selfsustaining providing the global recovery continues apace.

Employment (% change, 2008-09)

6.
Along some key dimensions, the global financial crisis had a much more
pronounced impact on South Africa
Changes in employment and growth
relative to some other large emerging
among the G-20 countries during 2008-09
4
markets. Notably, the contraction in South
3
African economic activity in 2009, while
2
1
smaller than those advanced countries at
0
the epicenter of the crisis, was still larger
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
-1
than in much of emerging Asia, and Latin
-2
America—Brazil’s economy declined by
South Africa
-3
-0.2 percent in 2009—and indeed much of
-4
-5
sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, by some
Real GDP (% change, 2008-09)
Source: WEO
measures, the scale of job shedding in
South Africa was among the highest in the G20, many of which also experienced banking
crises. One explanation for this seemingly disproportionate impact of the crisis on South
Africa is the sensitivity of the country’s main exports (diamonds, platinum, cars, etc.) to
credit conditions in the advanced countries.
7.
Reflecting the subdued domestic demand conditions inflation has declined
steadily. After peaking at some 12 percent
Inflation and Expectations
12.00
in late 2008, inflation as of April 2010
11.00
10.00
stood at 4¾ percent. The deceleration has
9.00
been somewhat sluggish reflecting the
8.00
7.00
extensive reliance on backward-looking
6.00
5.00
wage awards and administrative price
4.00
increases. Inflation expectations derived
from the bond market have also declined,
Inflation Expectations (Breakeven Bond Market Rates)
Inflation
Source: Datastream

10

6
and the inflation rate is expected to remain within the 3–6 percent target band over the next 2
quarters. Survey based measures of inflation expectation for 2011, however, remain above
the target band.
8.
Through April, the stock market and the rand strengthened significantly from
last year’s lows amid large capital inflows. The rebound in the rand is one of the strongest
among emerging markets, and has been largely driven by capital inflows (Figure 2). In
particular, portfolio flows in the first 4 months of 2010 have totaled some $6 billion, above
the $5 billion observed in during the same period in 2007 at the height of the global liquidity
glut. Price-to-earnings ratios on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange are now slightly above
their pre crisis average. Yields on government bonds have also drifted lower in the last year,
but have remained attractive enough to elicit substantial flows particularly in recent months.
Changes in global sentiment triggered by recent events in the Euro area, however, caused
portfolio inflows to abate, the local stock market to wobble, and the rand to weaken
somewhat in May, illustrating the high level of sensitivity of South Africa to developments in
the rest of the world.
9.
Looking ahead, the staff expects the recovery to be sustained, albeit in an
environment of heightened risks. Under the central scenario, output growth is projected to
be 3¼ percent in 2010, gradually rising to 4½ percent over the medium term with the output
gap expected to close by around 2014, driven in part by exports and a gradual recovery of
private investment and, to a lesser extent, household consumption. Inflation is also expected
to remain within the target band over the forecast horizon. There are, however, some mainly
downside risks to this scenario:


A hiatus in the global economic recovery would almost certainly stifle South Africa’s ongoing recovery. In particular, the elasticity of South African exports to the economic
performance of the Euro area, South Africa’s largest trading partner, is relatively high,
and any persistent weakness there can spill over onto the South African economy. The
risk of spillovers from any strains in the Euro area financial sector to South Africa is
mainly indirect through possible effects on the UK and the significant level of
nonresident activity in South Africa’s foreign exchange market (nonresident transactions
account for nearly three quarters of turnover).



A more marked differentiation in the speed of recovery of South Africa’s various trading
partners may also affect the sectoral composition of growth in South Africa, with
potential implications for job creation. South Africa’s exports to the Euro area are
dominated by manufacturing exports while its exports to, for example, China mainly
comprise of commodities.



The impact of ongoing global financial market uncertainty is a bit less clear. If it heads in
the direction of generalized risk aversion, then there may well be a sell-off of rand assets,

7

translating into tighter financing conditions for both corporates and the government. On
the other hand, if markets were to become more discriminating, South Africa’s relatively
sound macroeconomic situation may lead to more portfolio inflows, with attendant
pressure on the rand to appreciate.
10.
Over the medium term, the pick-up in growth, and the continuation of the
infrastructure investment program are expected to widen the current account deficit.
Continued rand strength and the country’s apparent structural savings-investment imbalance
are also likely to add to the current account deficit. These sustained deficits are a source of
vulnerability, especially given that volatile portfolio flows are projected to be the chief
source of funding for the current account over the medium term. However, there are some
important mitigating factors. Equity flows are an important source of financing of the current
account deficit, providing an important countercyclical impulse during downturns (as
demonstrated in 2009). The floating exchange rate acts as a shock absorber with foreign
investors sharing in the adjustment burden on occasions when capital flows out. External
debt is also low (28 percent of GDP at end-2009), though it is projected to increase, and
households and corporates have limited foreign currency exposure.
B. Ensuring Fiscal Sustainability
11.
The sizeable fiscal easing has helped ameliorate the impact of the crisis, albeit at
some cost. According to staff estimates, the structural fiscal deficit widened from 2¼ to
6 percent of GDP between 2008/09 and 2009/10 (text table), almost entirely on account of
discretionary spending increases. Part of it (about ¾ percentage points of GDP) was due to
lending to the state-owned electricity company (Eskom) and is thus expected to be a one-off.
Another 2 percentage points of GDP however went towards public sector salary increases as
well as increased coverage of social transfer programs and is thus of a more permanent
nature. On the revenue side, the staff’s work suggests that the decline in collections is mainly
due to the output gap, and should reverse as the gap gradually closes.1
12.
The government plans to reduce the fiscal deficit through lower spending
growth. Specifically, the 2010/11 budget documents noted that spending growth would be
curbed ambitiously from the 9 percent or so growth rate of the past three years to 2–3 percent
going forward. Under the authorities’ lower economic growth assumptions this would permit
1

See Aydin (2010, forthcoming) “Cyclicality of Revenue and Structural Balances in South Africa” shows that
tax revenue cycle is mainly explained by changes in the output gap and to a lesser degree by the credit cycle.
Asset and commodity prices do not have any explanatory power. Aydin (2010, forthcoming) “Performance of
Fiscal Accounts in South Africa in a Cross-Country Setting” shows that elasticity of revenues with respect to
growth in South Africa is quite high during the business cycle upturns.

8
Headline and Cyclically Adjusted Fiscal Balances and Public Debt, 2007/08-2012/13
(In percent of GDP)
2007/08
2008/09
2009/10
2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

Headline balances
Consolidated government
Public sector borrowing requirement

1.3
-0.6

-1.0
3.8

-6.7
11.1

-5.6
10.4

-4.1
7.8

-2.6
5.7

-0.2
0.9

-2.3
5.1

-6.0
10.4

-5.0
9.8

-3.5
7.2

-2.3
5.4

Fiscal impulse

-0.5

0.3

2.0

-0.2

0.0

-0.2

Government debt 1/
Public debt 2/

27.7
33.8

27.0
33.7

32.1
39.1

35.8
42.6

38.4
45.1

39.4
45.9

Cyclically adjusted balances
Consolidated government
Public sector borrowing requirement

1/ Includes the central government, and provincial and local government activities financed with transfers from the central government.
2/ Includes government debt, debt of local governments and local enterprises, and debt of nonfinancial public enterprises.

a gradual reduction in the fiscal deficit. 2 But with more evidence now that economic
growth—at least, in 2010—is likely to be higher than earlier envisaged, staff pointed to the
feasibility of a lower deficit path, provided that the government sticks to its announced
spending growth path (Table 2). In particular staff argued that such a spending path would
help:


prevent a pro-cyclical bias in fiscal
policy. The team’s estimates suggest
that a 2-3 percent real growth path
would be consistent with a broadly
neutral fiscal impulse following the
2009/10 impulse of more than
2 percent of GDP.



rebuild public savings quicker,
including with a view to containing
the current account deficit and
alleviating the burden on monetary
and exchange rate policy.



2

Source: National Treasury and IMF staff projections

avoid allocating still more resources to the public sector wage bill, in particular before the
effectiveness of the last round of large increases in improving public service delivery
have been ascertained.

The authorities’ 2010/11 budget envisages output to grow by 2¼ percent in 2010, and by 3¼–3½ percent in
outer years.

9
13.
The authorities affirmed their strong commitment to reducing the fiscal deficit
as quickly as practicable. They were guarded about the prospects for a quick a recovery in
revenue collections, preferring to be surprised on the upside. And should revenue collections
be higher than they currently envisage, they noted that they might use some of these
additional resources to fund urgent development priorities.
14.
A somewhat higher rate of spending growth can be accommodated, but staff
pointed out that longer-term fiscal needs warrant sticking to the announced spending
path. There are a number of reforms being contemplated that could entail significant
budgetary outlays in the near future—including social security and health care reforms. And
staff argued that if any of the additional fiscal room is to be exploited, it could more
productively be directed towards the unanticipated cost of these and related reforms and/or,
for example, to defray the cost of increasing international reserves further. Also, the
impressive increase in the revenue-to-GDP ratio in recent years looks mainly to have been on
account of an expansion in the tax base and significant improvement in tax administration.
But the tax buoyancy also reflects the strong credit boom since the mid-2000s. And with
rapid credit growth unlikely to be repeated in the near future, there is an outside possibility
that tax collections may underperform.
15.
Overall, under most plausible growth scenarios it should be possible to contain
public debt at reasonable levels. The consolidated government debt stock is now expected
to rise from 28 percent in 2007 and peak just under 40 percent in 2012 before declining
steadily in the outer years under the staff’s projections (Appendix 1). While this increase in
indebtedness is nontrivial, it would still leave both the debt-to-GDP and debt to tax revenue
ratios well below the averages of either the advanced countries or that of most of the large
G-20 emerging markets. Including the debt of public enterprises and local governments, the
debt-to-GDP ratio would peak at some 46 percent 2012—a still manageable debt level (Table
3). Borrowing by public enterprises is expected to remain at elevated levels over the
medium-term as they finance the much-needed infrastructure investment program. But to
contain fiscal risk, part of the resources required are being generated through higher tariffs—
with, for example, electricity prices set to increase by 25 percent a year for the next three
years, moving them closer to full cost recovery.
120
100

General government gross debt, 2015
(In percent of GDP)

80

350
300
250
200

60
150
40

100

20

50

0

0

Source: WEO

General government gross debt, 2015
(In percent of revenues)

10
C. Monetary Policy: Staying Ahead of the Curve
16.
Monetary policy considerations are now finely balanced. In particular, there was
agreement between the authorities and staff that the risks to the inflation outlook seem
broadly balanced. On the one hand, militating against a further cut in the policy rate is the
fact that economic recovery is now nicely in-train with the full impact of past monetary
easing yet to be realized (Figure 3). There are also nontrivial risks posed by on-going wage
settlements at well above the current inflation rate. In addition, the authorities saw some
upside risks to the inflation path from any adjustments to domestic administered prices
beyond anticipated electricity tariffs. These risks are however counter balanced by the fact
that households balance sheets remain under strain, credit growth remains anemic and the
output gap is not expected to close for another few years. Staff and the authorities agreed that
the focus of monetary policy should be to avoid falling behind the curve and, with risks
evenly balanced, that there might be a need to move fast in either direction in response to
new developments.
17.
The authorities feel that developments in the Euro areas pose considerable risk
to South Africa. Weaker-than-envisaged global growth could threaten the ongoing recovery.
And should this also lead to higher risk premia on South African assets, the related
depreciation of the rand could induce an unwelcome combination of higher inflationary
pressures alongside weak growth prospects. This could be particularly challenging for the
SARB, which might face a difficult policy dilemma requiring judgment on the relative threat
from those two risks.
18.
Staff noted that the inflation targeting regime has served South Africa well. The
framework has been flexible enough to allow a sharp reduction in interest rates as the
economy slowed down, and the policy rate is now at its lowest level in over a decade. Still,
this has not prevented criticism of the monetary policy framework. The Minister of Finance
has sought to remove any ambiguity by making it clear in a public letter that the inflation
targeting framework would continue to be implemented flexibly. The 3–6 percent target
range for headline inflation was affirmed. And the letter also outlined the need to continue to
pursue this objective with due regard to balanced and sustainable growth.
19.
The mission also welcomed the authorities enhanced communication efforts on
the monetary policy decisions. The staff’s work shows that agents are backward looking,
and expectations of next year’s inflation is shaped by inflation outcomes some three to four
quarters in the past. Staff estimates also show that these backward looking expectations in
turn play a prominent role in determining wage settlements, creating a relatively sticky
inflation series. A focused communication strategy on the part of the SARB that induces
agents to look forward when forming their inflation expectations, and perhaps place greater

11

weight on the SARB’s own forecasts, could help dampen the real cost of disinflation on the
domestic economy.3
20.
The recent steps to integrate banking and financial sector stability issues within
the monetary policy decision making framework are an important advance. South
Africa's financial system is comprised of large complex firms providing banking, insurance
and other financial services. And shocks to any segment of these business operations can
spill over within the firm, and more broadly to the financial sector as whole, given its
interlocking nature. The government has strengthened macro prudential analyses, and there is
further work planned on monitoring how shocks, such as sharp swings in domestic stock
prices induced by external turbulence, might affect the overall financial system.
Managing Capital Inflows
21.
The recent debate over the appropriate monetary policy framework has partly
been driven by the rand’s volatility. In the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the
fall of 2008, the rand was among the largest movers depreciating by some 30 percent in the
immediate aftermath of the crisis and by 19 percent through February 2009. In the 12-months
since, the rand appreciated strongly—again among the currencies with the largest
appreciation in the emerging market universe. These movements were mainly driven by the
ebb and flow of portfolio flows (Table 4). And the appreciation, in particular, has been the
source of strong concern lest it hampers the
recovery. Since April, the rand has
weakened somewhat in the wake of the
heightened uncertainties on global financial
markets. At its most recent valuation level,
the staff’s estimates suggest that the real
exchange rate could be around 5–15
percent overvalued, although there is a
large degree of uncertainty around these
Source: Bloomberg
estimates (Box 1).
22.
Against this backdrop, there was discussion of the appropriate policy response.
There was broad agreement that the flexible exchange rate regime had served South Africa
well and should be retained, but also recognition that exchange rate volatility had at times
been very high. Staff argued that there seems greater scope to use the opportunity provided
3

Rodney Ramcharan “Monetary Policy and Economic Fluctuations in Emerging Markets: Evidence from the
“Forecast Approach” in South Africa.”

12
by strong inflows to build reserves than has perhaps been the case in the recent past—
especially as they are on the low side compared to several standard metrics (Table 5). While
a modestly higher reserves buffer may not have much effect on the level of the exchange
rate, it could be helpful in absorbing large shocks. The authorities did not disagree. They
noted that reserve accumulation in recent months had been rather more than suggested by
changes in the level of gross reserves, which have remained broadly unchanged in US dollar
terms on account of valuation changes in nondollar assets. However, they also pointed to the
fiscal cost that is associated with the
accumulation of reserves. Lastly,
they noted that the scale and depth
of South Africa’s foreign exchange
markets—with a daily transaction
volume of the order of $10-12
billion—means that the
government’s ability to influence
the level of the rand is limited. The
pros and cons of other policy
options being discussed in the
Source: WEO
public domain were also considered:


Relaxing controls on outflows. As part of their gradual approach to the liberalization of
foreign exchange controls on residents, the authorities made some changes in October
2009 and March 2010.4 The staff’s sense was that further removal of controls should
continue to be part of this gradual approach and should not be accelerated given the
heightened uncertainties at the moment.



Controls on inflows. A small tax on inflows might help slow the volume of inflows or
change its composition. However, the international experience is that these tools might be
easily circumvented, with their effectiveness eroding overtime. Further, given South
Africa’s reliance on foreign savings to finance investment the adoption of such an
instrument would not be as straight forward.

4

The authorities announced a relaxation of capital controls on residents by increasing the limit on outward
investment by corporates from R 50 million to R 250 million, removing the 180 day rule for conversion of
foreign currencies into rand and by increasing the foreign capital allowance for individuals from R 2 million to
R 4 million.

13

Box 1. South Africa: Exchange Rate Assessment
South Africa’s floating exchange rate regime has been an important absorber of shocks, enabling the economy to
adjust in the face of the global financial crisis. The floating exchange rate has discouraged private sector
borrowing in foreign currency, preventing a buildup of foreign currency mismatches on household and corporate
sector balance sheets, and ensuring that foreign investors share in the adjustment burden in the event of rand
depreciation. However, the rand has appreciated strongly through 2009-10, likely driven by portfolio inflows and
a search for yield. Even following a period of volatility and depreciation in response to market turbulence in
Europe, the rand looks to be somewhat overvalued on a range of measures. The deterioration in export market
performance in 2009 with South Africa’s export volumes contracting much more sharply than import demand of
major trading partners (-20 percent versus -11 percent respectively) could also possibly point towards exchange
rate overvaluation, although specialization in credit-sensitive goods also likely played a role.
Staff estimates based on the IMF’s methodology, adapted for South Africa specific circumstances, suggest the
exchange rate could be around 5-15 percent overvalued—but with a wide range of uncertainty as illustrated by
the wide range of the confidence intervals.
Using CGER approaches:


The macroeconomic balance approach suggests the current
account norm is around -3 percent – somewhat less
negative than the level reached in 2009—and so this
approach points to an overvaluation of around 15 percent.1/



The external sustainability approach—based on stabilizing
the NFA at around -30 percent of GDP (similar to the
average of other emerging markets)—points to an even
bigger overvaluation of around 20 percent.



By contrast, the equilibrium real exchange rate approach
suggests that the exchange rate is close to balance. But this
approach hinges on the assumption that commodity prices
in the medium term will remain at their current elevated
levels, thus yielding little difference between the estimated
equilibrium and actual real exchange rates.

Source: IMF staff estimates

Discussions with private sector and other commentators also point to overvaluation estimates ranging from
around 5-15 percent. Analysts responding to a Reuters survey also typically expect a nominal depreciation of the
rand against the dollar of between 5 and 25 percent by the end of 2012.
1/ In both the macroeconomic balance and external sustainability approaches the projected current account deficit excludes the temporary but
persistent surge in public investment which would otherwise add 1.5 percentage points to the current account deficit. If the public investment
program is assumed to be permanent this would raise the estimate of current account overvaluation to around 24 percent and 28 percent respectively.

14


Interest rate cuts. There was broad agreement that interest rate decisions should remain
fully embedded in monetary policy considerations. Staff also argued that rate cuts for the
sole purpose of countering capital flows might well be counterproductive, as lower
interest rates might elicit more inflows into equities, and strengthen the exchange rate.



Policy mix. The current fiscal policy stance has been calibrated with a view to supporting
the recovery while alleviating infrastructure bottlenecks. Changing the mix towards a
much tighter fiscal stance would however require revisiting current fiscal objectives—
which are appropriately cast from a sustainability point of view.



Targeted interventions. Capital market imperfections can make it difficult, especially for
smaller firms to borrow against future profits and elevate hedging costs. The authorities
and staff thus saw some merit in temporary targeted intervention to help the enterprises
that are being most adversely affected by the strength of the rand. For instance, increases
in the investment tax allowance for small and medium-sized companies engaged in laborintensive nontraditional activities could be considered. By tying the benefit to investment,
this could help elicit more investment in plant and machinery as well as creating more
jobs. However, care would need to be taken to ensure that such measures are easily
reversible. Other options included finding ways to make it less costly for affected
companies to hedge exchange rate risk. There was though agreement that any such
schemes would need to be carefully designed to focus its coverage and with some degree
of automaticity so it expires when the degree of overvaluation diminishes.

Financial Sector
23.
The authorities noted that the banking sector has remained essentially sound,
although its activity was affected by the recession (Box 2). Banks remained profitable
despite the increase in impaired loans to 6 percent of gross loans and advances in January
2010 from 2 percent two years earlier—some of this increase may have been due to the
switch to Basel II accounting standards. In any event, no public support was extended during
the recession and capital adequacy ratios remained above their regulatory minima throughout
the crisis period (Figure 4). This in part reflected the banking sector’s moderate exposure to
foreign risk and the conservative regulatory environment. Nevertheless, the rise in idle
capacity and the sizable jobs losses have seen a contraction in credit extended to the private
sector thus far in 2010.
24.
South Africa has a strong bank supervisory framework. In following up on the
2009 FSAP update recommendations, staff welcomed ongoing actions by the bank and
nonbank regulators to exchange information on a regular basis. These include regular
supervisory meetings between the FSB and the BSD for the three largest banking and
insurance groups. And in 2010, there are plans to host a college of supervisors from those
African countries in which South African banks have a presence. In addition, the SARB is

15
developing a framework for the analysis of macro-prudential risks, and there has also been
liquidity risk reviews and simulation exercises involving the country’s major banks.
25.
However, staff also highlighted a number of challenges that require careful
monitoring. This included the potential implications of a sudden reversal of the recent sharp
increase in domestic stock prices and the transmission of external shocks (Table 6). The
interlocking nature of the financial system means that such a shock could have much wider
implications for financial stability, especially against the backdrop of weakened household
and enterprise balance sheets (Table 7). Also, the weak employment environment in
conjunction with large share of mortgages on the balance sheet of banks presents another
challenge that require monitoring. The authorities acknowledged these risks and stressed that
they are keeping a watchful eye on such risks. A joint IMF/World Bank team is finalizing an
assessment of the regulatory framework’s compliance with internationally accepted standards
and codes (Basel II, IOSCO and IAIS). This assessment was requested by the authorities in
response to an observation made by the Financial Stability Board. The preliminary
assessments are broadly positive; the assessors are making some recommendations to ensure
fuller compliance with the standards.
26.
The authorities and the banks are following the discussion on regulatory reform
taking place in global fora. They are of the view that many of the measures being proposed
are in fact already in effect in South Africa. However, they expressed reservations in
connection with special levies and taxes, arguing that the South African government had not
been called upon to support banks, and with stronger liquidity requirements, which would be
difficult to implement given the banks’ reliance on wholesale funding.
III. RAISING POTENTIAL GROWTH
A. Unemployment
27.
South Africa’s labor market has been characterized by persistently high
unemployment and low labor force participation. The country’s official unemployment
rate has stayed above 20 percent since the launch of the Labor Force Survey in 2000, and
remains the highest among G-20 countries. South Africa’s labor force participation rate, at
around 55 percent, is almost 20 percentage points below the median for G-20 countries.
28.
The recession has exacerbated this problem. In the first three quarters of 2009,
close to 1 million jobs were lost, which is almost equivalent to 7.3 percent of the total
employed workers at end-2008. After briefly stabilizing in the last quarter of 2009, job
shedding continued in the first quarter of this year. As of March 2010, the unemployment
rate in South Africa stands at some 25 percent based on the official narrow measure, which
excludes discouraged workers. If discouraged workers are included, close to 36 percent of
the labor force is unemployed.

16
29.
One feature of the labor market is its flexibility in the volume dimension. This is
evident from the fairly elastic response of employment to growth. Both during the upswing
(2000-07) and now the downswing (2008-09), the response of employment to growth in
South Africa was the highest among
the G-20. A look at measures of
employment protection legislation,
such as that compiled by the OECD,
also does not point too much by way
of policy-induced obstacles to hiring
and firing. South Africa has the
fourth lowest score among G-20
countries and the lowest score
Source: OECD
among G-20 emerging markets.
30.
But wages have proved much stickier. As economic growth slowed and eventually
turned negative during the period 2007-09, wage growth remained strong. The average wage
settlement between unions and the business in 2009 reached 9.3 percent, led by the public
sector wage increase of 11.2 percent, significantly outstripping inflation and productivity
gains. Consequently, unit labor costs increased by around 16 percent in the last two years,
one of the highest among a wide range of countries. But unlike the boom years when firms
could more easily pass-through higher labor costs onto final goods prices, the recession and
associated disinflation significantly limited firms’ pricing power. Thus, the strong wage
growth that continued during the recession looks to have contributed to the substantial job
losses. In the staff’s view, this suggests that the wage bargaining framework is not
sufficiently flexible.

Source: Stats SA

Source: WEO

31.
Most worrisome still, staff estimates that unemployment is likely to remain high
for a considerable period. Even allowing for the customary high elasticity of employment
with respect to output growth and assuming a constant labor participation rate, the
projections suggest that employment as a share of the total labor force would not return to its
recent 2008 peak until 2015 or so. It is only with growth in the region of 5½–6 percent that

17
employment levels would revert to the level last seen in 2008 by 2013. Thus, raising
potential growth to around 6 percent, and making such growth more labor intensive, is
paramount to large scale job creation.
32.
To address unemployment, the authorities are focused on orienting economic
policy to raise potential growth and increase its labor intensity. To this end, the
government has emphasized that its infrastructure construction program, intended to relieve
bottlenecks in electricity and transport, would raise potential growth over the medium term
and foster more job creation. Electricity remains a key constraint on economic activity, and
lower transport costs, would not only reduce the cost of business, but make it easier for
workers to commute to jobs, helping to overcome the legacy of spatial separation. The
authorities have also noted that elements of this infrastructure program have been designed to
be labor intensive, helping to facilitate faster job growth in the short run.
33.
The government is also contemplating more direct interventions in the labor
market, such as a wage subsidy aimed at younger workers. Current labor market
institutions do not allow for the productivity gap between young and older workers to be
reflected fully in wage differentials and so unemployment among young labor force entrants
is phenomenally high at some 50 percent (Table 8). The wage subsidy, if introduced, would
make it cheaper for firms to employ young unskilled workers, helping to build skills and
enhance the productivity of these workers over their careers. The authorities however noted
that there is no single measure available to address unemployment, and only a combination
of carefully designed initiatives as well as faster growth are likely to make significant inroads
in unemployment.
B. Other Structural Policies
34.
Enhancing product market competitiveness is also essential for raising potential
growth. In aggregate, the OECD has found that product market indicators for South Africa to
be more restrictive than any of its member countries other than Poland. While the degree of
product market restrictiveness in South Africa is not too dissimilar from that found in some
large non-OECD countries such as China, India and Russia, in South Africa it is coupled
with a dearth of significant informal sector activity, resulting in a relative lack of dynamism
and competition in product markets.
35.
In the main, the authorities are tackling this problem by strengthening the
enforcement of competition policy. To this end, for example, the activities of the
Competition Commission have been stepped-up considerably. Over the past year, the
Commission has undertaken a number of investigations and indentified cartel-like practices
in a range of input industries such as milling, imposing fines on those found guilty. The
Commission has also identified anti-competitive practices in the financial services sector, and
in response, the government has encouraged banks to lower fees and widen credit access for

18
consumers and small and medium sized firms. More generally, there have also been steps to
enhance private sector participation and lower costs in some sectors that are natural
monopolies, like transport.
36.
Staff welcomed these steps but also inquired if a broader and more market
based-impetus is not called for to enhance competition. Staff has in the past suggested—
and reiterated—that further liberalization of trade could be important in aiding product
market competition and that simplifying and making the tariff structure more transparent
would be helpful. The authorities however pointed to the generally low level of tariff and non
tariff barriers compared to other middle income countries. But in 2009 some steps were taken
to selectively raise tariff levels in favored industries.
37.
South Africa also remains committed to regional integration but economic
partnership agreements (EPA) with the EU by some SACU members poses challenges
for the customs union. The South African authorities remain concerned that there are
potential inconsistencies between Botswana’s, Lesotho’s and Swaziland’s interim economic
partnership agreements (EPAs) with the EU and the rules of the Southern Africa Customs
Union (SACU), which also includes Namibia. They noted that the interim EPAs contain
different rules of origin and tariffs structures and are difficult to harmonize with South
Africa’s trade regime. Thus there may be a need to accommodate different tariff structures at
the port of entry, complicating the operation of the customs union. The authorities noted that
the gradual expansion of SACU, which celebrated its centenary this year, remains a central
pillar of regional integration within the broader South African Development Community.
Further discussions with SACU will take place over the summer.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
Crisis and policy response. Building on over a decade of prudent macroeconomic
management, the South African government was able to orchestrate a timely and effective
countercyclical policy response to the recession. The economy appears to be recovering, and
staff strongly supports the easing of monetary and fiscal policies that was undertaken as the
economy slowed. It was timed well and of broadly the right magnitude.
39.
Challenges. Like the government, staff sees the overriding economic policy challenge
as reducing unemployment and inequality through higher economic growth. Fostering
growth in turn requires fiscal and monetary policies that will sustain the ongoing recovery
while gradually shifting to a more neutral stance so as to rebuild policy space.
40.
Context. As if this challenge was not demanding enough, it has to be pursued in a
much more complex and uncertain global environment—one where the threat from
exogenous shocks has heightened. This highlights the importance of preserving residual

19
policy space, especially as prolonged market volatility could depress growth in the European
Union, and dampen South African export demand.
41.
Approach. A useful starting principle is to sustain those policies that have been
reasonably effective and to change the policies in the areas which have been most
problematic. In the broadest of terms, this calls for sustaining the current macro policies and
framework, but bolder measures are needed to improve the effectiveness of labor and product
markets, where outcomes have been poor, through structural reforms. Against this backdrop,
the following policies would help consolidate the recovery while raising potential growth.
42.
Fiscal policy. The government’s current fiscal plan strikes the right balance between
supporting the ongoing recovery through sustained infrastructure investment while rebuilding
fiscal space. There is strong merit in adhering to the 2–3 percent real spending growth
targeted in the 2010/11 budget—particularly in the case of recurrent spending. Spending
growth, particularly on wages, should be benchmarked to productivity gains. Another round
of public sector wage settlements that exceed inflation and productivity gains would likely
distort wage negotiations in other sectors—and indeed hinder the ability of the SARB to
anchor inflation expectations.
43.
Monetary policy. The inflation targeting framework has served South Africa well and
the SARB’s series of interest rate cuts have significantly moderated the impact of the
recession. However, risks at this point are evenly poised, and the scope for further rate cuts
looks limited if the recovery proceeds as expected. But in the current highly uncertain
environment, the SARB should remain ready to move quickly in either direction—a
tightening (if there is an upward shift in inflation expectations) or a loosening (in response to,
say, a deterioration in external conditions) of the stance as needed to keep inflation
expectation anchored within the band. The backward looking nature of inflation expectations
and its significant role in determining wage settlements engender significant inflation inertia,
elevating the cost of disinflation. There is thus considerable scope for the SARB to continue
its communication and outreach to help make inflation expectations more forward looking
and enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy.
44.
The rand. Staff’s central estimates suggest that the rand is somewhat overvalued,
although the range of uncertainty accompanying these estimates is wide. At this juncture,
perhaps the most effective step that can be taken would be to use the opportunities provided
by large capital inflows to increase the level of international reserves so as to further increase
South Africa’s policy buffers in the event of large shocks. Easing monetary policy on its own
without the support of a tighter fiscal stance (or incomes policy to limit wage increases)
would simply lead to higher inflation and an unchanged real exchange rate.
45.
Interventions. Given capital market imperfections and the potentially high cost of
hedging currency movements, especially for smaller firms, targeted interventions to help the

20
enterprises that are being most adversely affected by the strength of the rand could mitigate
the negative output effects of the overvaluation. But given the pitfalls associated with such
approaches, South Africa’s foray into this area should be disciplined (time bound and with
performance-based criteria), transparent (on budget) and with a high degree of automaticity.
46.
Growth. The greater challenge in South Africa is to raise the country’s growth
potential. The government has put in-train a number of initiatives to this end—from
increased investment in infrastructure to more support to industry to improvements in the
provision of key public services such as education and health. These should contribute to
higher growth in the medium- to long-term. But the severity of the unemployment problem,
in particular, calls for bolder action to enhance the efficacy of labor and product markets.
And in terms of timing, there is a strong case for undertaking these reforms now during the
upswing of a business cycle, as more jobs are being created and profitability is improving.
47.
Labor market. As the government well recognizes, South Africa’s growth potential
cannot be unleashed without tapping into the large reservoir of unemployed people. The
wage subsidy proposal being considered for young workers would be a useful starting point,
although any such scheme would need to be carefully designed to minimize the displacement
of existing workers, and the substitution away from older workers. This is one area where
significant fiscal resources would be well-worth allocating. But perhaps of more importance
changes to the wage bargaining framework seem imperative. South Africa’s labor legislation
provides important and necessary protections for workers, but the large decline in
employment during the recession suggests that some hard choices must now be confronted.
Accordingly, a closer look at the bargaining framework so that it encourages employers and
employees to conclude more flexible wage contracts could help. Such provisions should
allow companies to adjust more easily to economic fluctuations in a way that preserves jobs.
48.
Product markets. Perhaps of equal importance, product markets in key economic
sectors such as finance and infrastructure services need to be made more competitive. Taking
into account stability considerations, greater competition in the financial sector should help
lower fees and reduce the cost of capital for businesses. Similarly, lower input costs
stemming from increased competition in the intermediate industrial products market can help
the external competitiveness of the manufacturing and other tradable sectors. Providing the
Competition Commission with greater resources and legal authority to identify and address
anticompetitive behavior would thus be useful. Continued trade liberalization, including by
reducing nontariff barriers, could also be an impetus for greater competition and innovation.
There is also scope for creating an enabling environment for private sector participation in
infrastructure projects. While it may not be necessary nor politically feasible to consider
wholesale private sector involvement in some areas, experimenting with private sector partners
on a project by project basis might help reduce infrastructure bottlenecks more quickly.
49.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation will be held on the standard
12-month cycle.

21
Box 2. The South African Financial Sector After the Crisis
The South African financial sector weathered the global financial and economic crisis without major problems.
There was no need for public support, and capital adequacy ratios remained above their regulatory minima
throughout the crisis period. This was in part the result of financial sector firms’ moderate exposure to foreign
risk and reliance on traditional lending frameworks, and of the proactive approach pursued by regulators (e.g.,
the bank supervisor spearheaded the early adoption of Basel II, concluded in 2008, with capitalization
requirements above those recommended by the Basel Committee).
Nevertheless, the recession had a significant impact on the financial sector. Private sector credit growth has
been mildly negative in recent months, compared to growth of 20 percent or so during 2005-2008. The
recession has also led to a pronounced increase in impaired loans in the banking system, which rose to 6 percent
of gross loans and advances in January 2010, from 2 percent two years earlier.51As a result, banks’ profitability
declined, but remains positive, at 0.9 percent of assets and 15.8 percent of equity as of December 2009. The
combined effect of these and other trends has been a shrinking of the balance sheets of banks (text table). This
is expected to be reversed as the recovery takes hold and businesses expand again, although a return to high
rates of growth of credit aggregates is unlikely, given that many firms and households are still highly geared.
The impact of the recession on the South African banking system appears to have been broadly similar to that
observed in other emerging market economies (text figure). By and large, the effects in this group of countries
have been moderately adverse. One area where developments in South Africa were somewhat atypical is the
evolution of credit, which in most other countries only decelerated, but remained positive.
Selected Emerging Markets: Financial Soundness Indicators
9

Non-performing loans (% of total loans)

Returns on average assets

6

8
7

5

6

4

5

3

4

Average for 2006/07

Average for 2006/07

Turkey

Thailand

Poland

South Africa

Philippines

Korea

Malaysia

India

Indonesia

Hungary

Czech Republic

China

Chile

Brazil

Turkey

Thailand

Poland

South Africa

Philippines

Malaysia

Korea

Indonesia

Colombia

Chile

China

2009

2009

Capital adequacy ratio (percent)

Change in Credit-to-GDP-Ratio (percent)
15

25

10

20

5

15

0

10

5

-5

2009

Average for 2006/07

Turkey

Thailand

South Africa

Poland

Philippines

Korea

Malaysia

Indonesia

India

Hungary

Colombia

China

Chile

Turkey

Thailand

South Africa

Poland

Philippines

Malaysia

Korea

Indonesia

India

Hungary

China

Colombia

Chile

Brazil

Czech Republic

Average for 2006/07

Brazil

0

-10

Czech Republic

Brazil

India

0

0

Czech …

1

1

Hungary

2

Colombia

2

3

2009

Source: VEE Database.

5

In South Africa, with the implementation of Basel II in January 2008, the concept of ‘non-performing loans’ was replaced
with that of ‘impaired advances’, which is broader, making comparisons over time difficult.

22

Figure 1. South Africa: Real Sector Developments
12
8

The economy is expanding...
20

Real GDP Growth
(Percent change, y-o-y)

15

5

0

0
-5

-4

-12
-16

Monthly Production Indices
(Percent change, y-o-y)

10

4

-8

...led by a sharp supply side rebound

-10

Brazil
South Africa
Turkey
Mexico

-15

Manufacturing Production
Mining Production
Electricity Generated

-20
-25

but consumer demand remains weak.
35
30
25
20
15

...amid high unemployment...
14000

Consumer Demand Indices
Consumer Confidence Index
13500
(Range: -30 to 30)
Wholesale (percent change, y-o-y)
Retail (percent change, y-o-y)

34

Employment
32

unemployment rate
(percent, rhs)

30

13000

28

10

12500

Number of

5

employed

0

12000

(thousands, lhs)

-5
11500

-10

26
24
22

-15
11000

-20

5.0
3.0

20

while the external position has improved...

… underlied by strong demand from Asia.

Current Account and SI Balances
(percent of GDP)

Exports by Destination
(in percent of total)

1.0

12
10
8

2009

-1.0

2000

-3.0

6
4

-5.0
2
-7.0
-9.0

Private sector
Public Sector

Sources: SARB, Statistics South Africa, and IMF.

0

23
Figure 2. South Africa: Exchange Rates, Asset Prices and Spreads
...in line with the recovery in commodity
prices...

The real exchange rate appreciated sharply in
2009 ...
140
130

1.5

Real Exchange Rate
(September 2008=100)

1

Rolling Correlation of Rand with
Commodity Prices

120
0.5

110

0

100
90

-0.5

80
South Africa
Mexico

70
60

Brazil
Turkey

-1

Rand/US$ to Gold

-1.5

...with volatility reflecting international
developments.

Equity prices have also risen...
25

Rand/US$ to Platinum

35

P/E Ratio (2007-2010)

80

30
20

South Africa

Mexico

10

5

0

Turkey

Historical P/E Ratios

10

South Africa Yield Curve
(percent)

VIX (right-scale)

70
60

20

50

15

40
30

10

20

South Africa
Turkey
Mexico
Brazil

5

10

0

Yields have also fallen, especially on the short
end...
11

SAVI

25

Brazil

15

90

30-Day Volatility (SAVI and VIX)

0

...again following international trends.
800

Sovereign Spreads on US$-Denominated
Government Bonds (Basis points)

Date Issued:

1/1/2010
2/1/2010
3/1/2010
9/1/2009

9

600

400
Spread (EMBIG)

8

200
Spread (South Africa)

7
3
1.5
2.75 4 Years 5.25
6.5
7.75 9 Years
months Years Years
Years Years Years
Time to maturity

0

Sources: South African Reserve Bank; Datastream; Amalgamated Bank of South Africa; and IMF.

24
Figure 3. South Africa: Monetary Developments and Interest Rates
After responding to idiosyncratic supply side shocks,
South African interest rates have fallen in tandem with
14

Real interest rates have also fallen, albeit more
slowly...
5

Spread South Africa and Global Interest
Rates

12

Real Interest Rate

4

10
3

8
6

2

South African Policy Rate
Federal Funds Rate
Spread

4

1

2
0

0
-2

-1

The interbank and benchmark consumer rates have
also fallen, but the spread has remained stable over
the business cycle.

1

18

Spread Interbank and Prime
16 Overdraft Rate

Stability in the interbank market was achieved
despite the recent spike due to the volatility in the
European markets.
90-day Volatility JIBAR )

0.8

14
12

0.6

10
8
6

Interbank Rate
Prime Overdraft Rate

0.4

Spread

4

0.2

2
0

0

But medium- and long-term bond yields have diverged from short-term rates.
14

South Africa: Government Bond Yields

12
11

12

Interest Rates
(Percent)
Short-term interest rate
(T-bill)

10
10
9
8
8
6

4

R154 (Short-Term)
R157 (Medium-Term)
R186 (Long-Term)

7

Long-term interest rate
(10-year bond)

6

Sources: South African Reserve Bank; Datastream; Amalgamated Bank of South Africa; and IMF.

25
Figure 4. South Africa: Financial Sector Developments
South African Banks appear well-capitalized...
30

and remain profitble...

35

Capital Adequacy Ratio
(percent)

Debt-to-Equity Ratio
(percent)

30

25

25

20

20
15

South Africa

South Africa

15
10
10
5

5

49 emerging markets
0
0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
Return on average assets

2.5

3.0

49 emerging markets
Averaged from 2005-2008

0
0

as NPLs have stabilized.

5

6

20

25

However, credit growth is still in the negative territory...
34

7

10
15
Return on Assets

Impaired Loans
(Percent of total loans)

29

Private Sector Credit Growth
(12-Term Percentage Change)

24

5

Total
Impaired
Loans

4

19
14
9

3

4

2

-1
1

-6

0

partially due to banks being more conservative...
14.0
13.0

6.5

Banking Liquidity
(In percentage point)

6

12.0

84.0
5

9.0

6.0

Banking Sector Concentration
(in percentage point)

5.5

10.0

7.0

85.0
84.5

11.0

8.0

and limited competition in the financial markets.
85.5

Liquid assets to short-term
liabilities
Liquid assets to total assets
(right scale)

83.5

4.5

83.0

4

82.5

Sources: South African Reserve Bank; Datastream; Amalgamated Bank of South Africa; and IMF.

Market share (top
four banks)
Gini concentration
index

26
Table 1. South Africa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2008–15
No minal GDP (2009): US$ 287.2 billio n
P o pulatio n (2009): 49.3 millio n
GDP per capita (2009): US$ 5,825
2008

2009

2010

2011

P ro jected
2012
2013

2014

2015

(A nnual percent change, unless o therwise indicated)
N a t io na l inc o m e a nd pric e s
Real GDP
Real GDP per capita
Real do mestic demand
Output Gap 1/
GDP deflato r
CP I (annual average)
CP IX (end o f perio d) 2/

3.7
1.9
3.3
3.0
9.2
11.5
10.3

-1.8
-3.0
-1.8
-1.2
8.0
7.1
…

3.2
2.0
5.5
-0.4
7.2
5.6
…

3.6
2.4
4.5
0.4
7.2
5.8
…

La bo r m a rk e t
Unemplo yment rate (percent)
A verage remuneratio n (fo rmal no nagricultural secto r)
Labo r pro ductivity (fo rmal no nagricultural secto r)
No minal unit labo r co sts (fo rmal no nagricultural secto r)

21.9
12.8
1.0
11.7

24.3
8.5
4.5
3.9

24.8
7.1
3.7
3.3

24.4
7.9
3.7
4.1

23.7
8.2
5.0
3.0

23.5
7.9
4.5
3.3

23.2
7.7
3.8
3.8

22.7
7.2
3.6
3.5

E xt e rna l s e c t o r
Current acco unt balance

3.9
2.7
3.9
0.9
7.0
5.6
…

4.2
3.0
4.1
1.3
6.8
5.2
…

4.4
3.2
4.3
0.0
6.5
5.0
…

4.5
3.3
4.4
0.0
6.2
4.5
…

-7.1

-4.0

-4.5

-6.4

-6.7

-7.1

-7.3

-7.5

Overall balance o f payments
To tal external debt

1.1
25.9

0.7
27.5

1.0
26.5

0.0
28.2

0.0
29.9

0.0
31.8

0.0
33.6

0.0
35.2

Gro ss reserves (SA RB , billio ns o f U.S. do llars)

34.1

39.7

43.0

43.0

43.0

43.0

43.0

43.0

5.1
12.8
10.1
2.4
1.4
0.7
-18.5
-12.9

5.2
-22.7
-26.7
-18.7
-17.4
6.9
25.6
23.5

5.0
10.8
15.1
3.1
11.9
5.5
…
…

4.8
4.4
10.6
3.2
6.5
-3.4
…
…

4.5
5.7
5.8
4.7
4.5
-0.3
…
…

4.2
6.5
6.6
5.5
4.8
-0.9
…
…

3.9
6.6
6.7
5.6
4.8
-0.8

3.7
6.7
6.8
5.7
4.9
-0.7

9.6
14.8
1.3
11.5

3.7
1.6
1.3
7.0

16.1
19.2
1.3
…

11.6
12.8
1.2
…

12.0
12.9
1.2
…

12.1
12.9
1.2
…

12.2
12.9
1.2

12.2
12.9
1.1

(mo nths o f next year's to tal impo rts)
M erchandise expo rts, f.o .b. 3/
M erchandise impo rts, f.o .b. 3/
Expo rt (go o ds and services) vo lume
Impo rt (go o ds and services) vo lume
Terms o f trade
No minal effective exchange rate 4/
Real effective exchange rate 4/
M o ne y a nd c re dit
Net do mestic assets 5/
B ro ad mo ney (including fo reign exchange depo sits)
Velo city (GDP /average bro ad mo ney)
B ank rate/repurchase rate (end o f perio d, percent) 6/

(In percent o f GDP , unless o therwise indicated)
Inv e s t m e nt a nd s a v ing
Investment (including invento ries)
Of which:
P ublic fixed investment (including public enterprises)
P rivate fixed investment
Gro ss natio nal saving
P ublic (including public enterprises)
P rivate
G e ne ra l go v e rnm e nt budge t 7 /
Revenue, including grants
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance
General go vernment debt
B o rro wing requirement o f the no nfinancial public secto r
- cyclically adjusted

22.0

19.3

22.1

21.7

21.3

21.1

21.0

20.9

7.9
14.6
14.9
4.2
10.7

9.1
13.3
15.3
2.4
12.9

9.9
13.7
17.5
-0.3
17.9

9.4
13.7
15.2
0.5
14.7

8.9
13.9
14.6
1.9
12.7

8.6
14.0
14.1
3.5
10.6

8.4
14.1
13.7
4.5
9.1

8.2
14.2
13.4
5.7
7.7

29.4
29.9
-0.5
27.2
2.7
3.1

27.5
32.8
-5.3
30.8
9.3
8.1

27.2
33.1
-5.9
34.8
10.6
8.8

27.8
32.2
-4.4
37.7
8.4
7.8

28.3
31.3
-3.0
39.1
6.2
6.8

28.9
30.3
-1.3
38.8
5.1
…

29.5
29.7
-0.2
37.8
4.4
…

30.1
29.2
0.9
34.8
2.8
…

So urces: So uth A frican Reserve B ank; IM F, Internatio nal Financial Statistics; and IM F staff pro jectio ns.
1/ P ercentage deviatio n o f RGDP fro m P o tential.
2/ Since January 2009, a reweighted and rebased CP I replaced the previo usly used CP IX (the co nsumer price index excluding the
interest o n mo rtgage lo ans) as the targeted measure o f inflatio n.
3/ In U.S. do llars; annual percent change.
4/ End-o f-perio d. Fo r 2009, September relative to December 2008.
5/ Co ntributio n (in percentage po ints) to the gro wth o f bro ad mo ney.
6/ In 2009, as o f July 9.
7/ Calendar-year figures, based o n Natio nal Treasury data and IM F staff pro jectio ns.

27

Table 2. South Africa: National Government Main Budget, 2007/08–2012/13 1/
(In percent of GDP)
Proj. 2/
2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12

2012/13

Total revenue and grants
Tax revenue
Income tax
Of which:
Personal income tax
Corporate taxes (CIT+STC)
Indirect taxes
Of which:
Value-added tax
Excises
Trade and other (less SACU payments)
Other tax revenue
Of which : trade taxes
Of which : SACU payments 3/
Nontax revenue
Grants

26.9
26.3
16.0

26.2
25.7
16.5

23.4
23.0
14.3

23.8
23.4
14.0

24.3
23.9
14.4

24.8
24.4
14.7

8.1
7.7
9.4

8.4
8.0
8.7

8.3
6.1
8.0

8.3
5.6
8.6

8.9
5.4
8.4

9.1
5.5
8.6

7.2
2.0
1.0
0.9
1.3
1.2
0.6
0.0

6.6
1.9
0.5
0.7
1.0
1.2
0.5
0.0

6.0
2.0
0.7
1.0
0.8
1.1
0.4
0.0

6.1
2.2
0.9
0.7
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.0

6.0
2.1
1.1
0.7
0.8
0.4
0.4
0.0

6.2
2.1
1.1
0.7
0.8
0.4
0.4
0.0

Total expenditure
Interest
Transfer to subnational governments
Of which:
Provinces
Municipalities
Other

26.0
2.5
11.8

27.4
2.3
12.6

30.0
2.2
13.9

29.7
2.6
13.5

29.1
2.8
12.8

28.3
3.0
13.0

10.0
1.8
11.7

10.7
1.9
12.4

11.9
2.0
13.9

11.7
1.8
13.6

11.0
1.8
13.4

10.8
2.2
12.3

0.9

-1.2

-6.6

-5.9

-4.7

-3.5

-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

-1.0

-6.4

-5.9

-4.7

-3.5

-1.0
0.2
-0.2
-0.9

1.0
1.5
-0.2
-0.4

6.4
6.1
0.3
-0.1

5.9
5.4
0.4
0.1

4.7
4.2
0.4
0.1

3.5
3.1
0.4
0.1

2,082
5.0
8.1
3.4

2,322
2.5
8.8
1.2

2,479
-1.3
8.2
-4.4

2755.2
3.9
7.0
-3.2

3057.8
3.5
7.2
-1.9

3404.3
4.1
7.0
-0.5

Budgetary balance
Extraordinary payments, net 4/
Augmented balance
Financing
Domestic borrow ing (net)
Foreign borrow ing (net)
Change in cash and other items
Mem orandum item s:
GDP (billions of rand)
Real GDP grow th, percent
GDP deflator, percent change
Primary balance, in percent of GDP

Sources: South African authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ For fiscal year beginning April 1. National government comprises the central government and subnational spending
financed by transfers from the national revenue fund.
2/ Staff projections based on the 2010 Budget Review , and staff estimates.
3/ SACU payments are based on a revenue-sharing formula.
4/ Mainly related to debt management transactions.

28
Table 3. South Africa: Nonfinancial Public Sector Operations, 2007/08-2012/13 1/
2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12
Proj. 2/

2012/13

(In percent of GDP)
Consolidated national and provincial governments
Total revenue and grants
National government
Provinces (own revenue)
Social security funds (own revenue)
Extrabudgetary and other

28.6
26.9
0.4
1.2
0.0

29.7
26.2
0.0
0.0
3.5

26.8
23.4
0.0
0.0
3.4

27.3
23.8
0.0
0.0
3.5

27.9
24.3
0.0
0.0
3.6

28.5
24.8
0.0
0.0
3.6

Total expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Other goods and services
Interest

27.3
26.0
8.5
3.7
2.5

30.7
28.1
10.0
5.4
2.5

33.5
30.0
10.9
5.8
2.5

32.9
29.5
10.7
5.7
2.8

32.0
29.3
10.3
5.5
3.1

31.1
28.2
9.8
5.3
3.3

11.2
1.3
0.0

10.2
2.1
0.0

10.8
2.2
0.0

10.3
2.5
0.2

10.3
2.3
0.4

9.9
2.2
0.7

1.3

-1.0

-6.7

-5.6

-4.1

-2.6

-0.6
-1.0
-0.1

3.8
1.0
0.6

11.1
6.4
0.5

10.4
5.9
0.3

7.8
4.7
0.0

5.7
3.5
0.0
-0.2

3

Transfers
Capital expenditure
Contingency
Overall balance
Public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR)
National government 4/
Other government borrowing
Provincial governments

-0.1

0.4

0.1

-0.1

-0.1

0.7

0.7

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

Extrabudgetary funds and institutions
Nonfinancial public enterprises

-0.8
0.5

-0.6
2.3

-0.1
4.2

-0.1
4.3

-0.4
3.1

-0.4
2.3

Memorandum items:
Non-financial public sector debt (gross)

33.8

33.7

39.1

42.6

45.1

45.9

2.8
14.6
1.3

3.7
15.8
1.3

4.8
16.9
1.3

5.1
16.8
1.2

4.8
16.6
1.2

5.0
16.0
1.2

Local govts. and local enterprises

SOE investment
Social spending 5/
Defense spending

Sources: South African authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ For fiscal year beginning April 1.
2/ Staff projections based on the authorities' policy intentions as outlined in the 2010 budget.
3/ For 2008/9 - 2010/11, includes a large loan to the electricity provider Eskom (R 60 billion in total).
4/ Includes extraordinary payments less extraordinary receipts.
5/ Health, education, welfare and community development.

29
Table 4. South Africa: Balance of Payments, 2008–15
2008

2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012
2013

2014

2015

(US $ billions)
Balance on current account
Balance on goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Exports of goods
Nongold
Gold
Exports of services
Imports of goods and services
Imports of goods
Imports of services
Balance on income
Income receipts
Income payments
Balance on transfers

-19.6
-8.3
98.1
85.4
79.5
5.9
12.8
-106.5
-89.7
-16.8
-9.0
5.8
-14.8
-2.3

-11.4
-2.4
77.9
65.9
59.7
6.3
11.9
-80.3
-65.7
-14.6
-6.3
4.0
-10.4
-2.7

-15.7
-5.3
87.1
73.1
66.0
7.1
14.0
-92.4
-75.6
-16.9
-7.6
5.5
-13.1
-2.7

-22.8
-12.1
90.1
76.3
69.5
6.8
13.8
-102.2
-83.6
-18.6
-8.0
6.6
-14.6
-2.7

-25.0
-13.0
95.2
80.6
74.2
6.4
14.6
-108.2
-88.5
-19.7
-9.4
6.8
-16.2
-2.7

-28.1
-14.0
101.4
85.8
79.7
6.2
15.5
-115.4
-94.3
-21.0
-11.4
7.0
-18.4
-2.7

-30.5
-15.0
108.1
91.5
85.6
5.9
16.6
-123.0
-100.6
-22.4
-12.9
7.2
-20.0
-2.6

-33.2
-15.9
115.3
97.6
91.9
5.7
17.7
-131.2
-107.5
-24.0
-14.7
7.3
-22.0
-2.6

Capital flows (including errors and omissions)
Balance on capital and financial account
Balance on capital account
Balance on financial account
Direct investment
Liabilities
Assets
Portfolio investment
Liabilities
Assets
Other investment
Liabilities
Assets
Errors and omissions

22.8
11.7
0.0
11.7
12.2
9.0
3.1
-16.3
-8.7
-7.7
15.8
5.8
10.1
11.1

13.5
12.6
0.0
12.6
4.1
5.7
-1.6
11.0
12.7
-1.7
-2.6
-5.0
2.5
0.9

19.0
19.0
0.0
18.9
1.6
2.0
-0.4
16.3
19.1
-2.7
1.0
4.6
-3.6
0.0

22.8
22.8
0.0
22.8
3.6
4.0
-0.4
18.5
21.9
-3.4
0.8
3.5
-2.7
0.0

25.0
25.0
0.0
25.0
3.8
4.2
-0.4
20.2
23.8
-3.6
1.0
3.0
-2.0
0.0

28.1
28.1
0.0
28.0
4.0
4.4
-0.4
22.1
25.9
-3.8
2.0
3.2
-1.2
0.0

30.5
30.5
0.0
30.5
4.2
4.6
-0.4
23.5
27.5
-4.0
2.8
3.4
-0.6
0.0

33.2
33.2
0.0
33.2
4.4
4.9
-0.4
25.8
30.1
-4.3
3.0
3.5
-0.5
0.0

Overall balance of payments
Gross reserves (SARB) 1/

3.2
34.1

2.1
39.7

3.3
43.0

0.0
43.0

0.0
43.0

0.0
43.0

0.0
43.0

0.0
43.0

International Liquidity Position of the SARB 1/ 2/

31.9

39.0

42.3

42.3

42.3

42.3

42.3

42.3

(Percent of GDP)
Balance on current account
Balance on goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Capital flows (including errors and omissions)
Balance on capital and financial account
Errors and omissions

-7.1
-3.0
35.5
-38.5

-4.0
-0.9
27.1
-28.0

-4.5
-1.5
25.2
-26.8

-6.4
-3.4
25.4
-28.8

-6.7
-3.5
25.5
-29.0

-7.1
-3.6
25.8
-29.3

-7.3
-3.6
26.0
-29.5

-7.5
-3.6
26.1
-29.7

8.2
4.2
4.0

4.7
4.4
0.3

5.5
5.5
0.0

6.4
6.4
0.0

6.7
6.7
0.0

7.1
7.1
0.0

7.3
7.3
0.0

7.5
7.5
0.0

Overall balance of payments

1.1

0.7

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Gross Reserves (SARB)

12.3

13.8

12.5

12.1

11.5

10.9

10.3

9.7

M emorandum items:
Total external debt
Foreign currency debt
Of which : Short-term debt (at remaining maturity)
Total external debt service (billions of U.S. dollars)
Gold price (period average; U.S. dollar per ounce)
Crude oil price (period average; U.S. dollar per barrel)

25.9
15.2
6.7
9.4
872
97

27.5
15.3
6.6
9.1
973
62

26.5
13.8
5.8
17.3
1,183
75

28.2
15.1
6.3
10.3
1,221
78

29.9
16.1
6.5
15.9
1,245
80

31.8
17.4
6.9
14.9
1,281
82

33.6
18.6
7.2
13.5
1,329
84

35.2
19.7
7.5
14.9
1,380
86

Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ End of period.
2/ Gross reserves minus foreign loans and minus forward position.

30
Table 5. South Africa: Monetary Survey, 2005–09
(December)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

390.5
847.4
317.0
530.4
456.9
6.1
450.8
1,523.7
44.7
179.5
134.8
1,981.1
-502.1
1,914.2
753.6

384.2
714.1
292.7
421.4
329.9
2.7
327.3
1,560.7
85.7
223.8
138.1
1,970.1
-495.2
1,944.8
805.5

(In billions of rand)
Net foreign assets
Gross reserves
SARB
Other monetary institutions
Liabilities
SARB
Other monetary institutions
Net domestic assets
Credit to government, net
Claims on government
Government deposits
Credit to private sector
Other items, net
Broad money (M3)
Of which: M1

195.1
297.8
130.5
167.3
102.6
22.2
80.4
906.0
0.8
107.4
106.6
1,140.2
-235.0
1,101.1
503.1

274.3
304.5
409.8
561.7
178.3
224.3
231.5
337.4
135.5
257.2
19.3
12.0
116.2
245.2
1,075.0 1,363.1
-29.5
-32.5
112.4
116.5
141.8
149.0
1,434.9 1,743.9
-330.4
-348.3
1,349.3 1,667.6
605.7
738.3

(In annual percentage change)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to private sector
Broad money (M3)

38.0
17.2
19.5
20.5

40.5
18.7
25.8
22.5

11.0
26.8
21.5
23.6

28.2
11.8
13.6
14.8

-1.6
2.4
-0.6
1.6

(Contribution to growth in M3, unless otherwise specified)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to government, net
Credit to private sector
Other items, net

5.9
14.6
-4.6
20.3
-1.2

7.2
15.4
-2.7
26.8
-8.7

2.2
21.3
-0.2
22.9
-1.3

5.2
9.6
4.6
14.2
-9.2

-0.3
1.9
2.1
-0.6
0.4

Memorandum item:
Income velocity of M3

1.55

1.42

1.32

1.25

1.25

Source: South African Reserve Bank.

31
Table 6. South Africa: Indicators of Vulnerability, 2005–09
(In percent of GDP, unless otherw ise specified)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Financial indicators
Government debt 1/
Broad money (percent change; 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change; 12-month basis)
Repurchase rate 2/
Repurchase rate (real) 2/ 3/

34.6
20.5
19.5
7.0
2.9

32.6
22.5
25.8
9.0
3.8

28.3
23.6
21.5
11.0
2.2

27.2
14.8
13.6
11.5
1.1

30.8
1.6
-0.6
7.0
0.6

External indicators
Exports of goods and services (percent change; US$ value)
16.6 15.9 14.1
9.7 -20.6
Imports of goods and services (percent change; US$ value)
17.3 23.2 15.4
8.8 -24.6
Terms of trade (percent change)
1.5
3.5
1.8
0.7
6.9
Current account balance
-3.5 -5.3 -7.2 -7.1 -4.0
Capital and financial account balance
4.9
6.1
7.6
4.2
4.4
Gross official reserves (US$ billion) 2/
20.6 25.6 33.0 34.1 39.7
Short-term foreign liabilities of SARB (US$ billion) 2/
0.7
2.6
2.7
2.2
2.2
International liquidity position of SARB (US$ billion) 2/ 4/
17.2 23.0 30.2 31.9 37.5
Short-term external debt plus open forw ard position (US$ billion)
14.1 17.0 18.6 18.5 19.0
Gross official reserves as a percent of the above
145.9 150.5 177.5 184.7 209.0
Foreign currency-denominated external debt (US$ billion)
28.1 35.8 43.6 42.0 44.1
As a percent of total exports
41.5 45.6 48.8 42.8 56.6
External interest payments (as a percent of total exports)
3.8
4.5
4.7
4.8
5.9
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar; period average) 5/
6.36 6.77 7.05 8.25 8.44
8.5
Real effective exchange rate appreciation (period average; percent) 6/ 0.5 -2.5 -3.3 -12.9
Financial market indicators 2/
Stock market index (1994=100) 5/
Percent change 5/
Foreign currency debt rating–Standard & Poor's
Foreign currency debt rating–Moody's
Spread of benchmark bonds (basis points) 7/

303 419 487 362 465
42.6 38.0 16.2 -25.7 28.6
BBB+ BBB+ BBB+ BBB+ BBB+
Baa1 Baa1 Baa1 Baa1
A3
84
87 166 562 290

Sources: South African Reserve Bank and IMF staff estimates.
1/ National government debt, end of period.
2/ End of period.
3/ Deflated by the percent change in end-period CPI.
4/ Gross reserves minus foreign loans and minus forw ard position. The SARB's open position in the
forw ard market w as closed in February 2004.
5/ For 2009, as of July 9; stock market index change w ith regard to end-2008.
6/ SARB.
7/ Until end-2005: a 2017 US$ denominated bond vs. a comparable synthetic U.S. bond from Merrill Lynch;
since 2006: JP Morgan's EMBI+ Global Bond Spread for South Africa. End of period. For 2009, as of July 6.

32
Table 7. South Africa: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2005–10
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010 1/

Capital adequacy:
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Regulatory tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets 2/

12.7
9.7

12.3
9.0

12.8
9.5

13.0
10.2

14.12
10.97

14.26
11.06

Asset quality:
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans 3/
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital 3/
Share of mortgage advances in domestic private credit 3/

1.5
6.4
46.2

1.1
5.6
47.7

1.4
8.2
49.0

3.9
…
48.8

5.94
…
50.5

5.86

Earnings and profitability:
Return on assets (average)
Return on equity (average)
Interest margin to gross income
Noninterest expenses to gross income

1.2
15.2
38.2
61.5

1.4
18.3
43.8
48.5

1.4
18.1
58.5
48.9

2.1
28.7
44.6
42.2

0.9
15.9
51.2
51.1

0.9
15.2

Liquidity:
Liquid assets to total assets
Share of short-term deposits in total deposits

4.8
43.5

4.6
42.8

4.6
42.4

4.7
36.4

6.4
38.2

Exposure to foreign exchange (FX) risk:
Effective net open FX position to capital
Share of foreign currency loans in total lending
Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits 4/
Share of foreign liabilities in total liabilities 5/

1.9
11.1
2.7
4.2

1.4
11.4
3.3
5.3

0.7
9.3
3.0
6.0

0.5
7.7
3.6
6.2

0.7
6.9
2.6
4.9

51.8

Source: South African Reserve Bank.
1/ As of March 2010.
2/ Total (banking and trading book).
3/ The definition of nonperforming loans until end-2007 comprised doubtful and loss loans. Doubtful are loans overd
180 days unless well secured, or with a timely realization of the collateral. Since 2008, the indicator reflects the rat
impaired advances to total advances (in line with Basel II definitions), a more stringent definition.
4/ Domestic private credit not seasonally adjusted.
5/ Foreign funding to total funding.

33

Table 8. South Africa: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2008 1/
1990
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 a day (%)
Poverty gap at $1 a day (%)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%
Prevalence of child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)

1995

2000

2005

2007

2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates
...
6.3
10.7
...
…
...
0.6
1.7
...
…
...
3.6
3.1
...
…
...
9.2
...
...
…
…
3.0
...
...
…

2008

…
…
…
…
…

90.0
…

2015 target = net enrollment to 100
...
96.0
...
93.9
93.5
...

…
…

…
…

104.0
...
42.6
3.0

2005 target = education ratio to 100
...
103.0
...
101.0
99.9
...
43.6
44.6
...
25.0
30.0
32.8

…
…
42.9
33.0

…
…
33.0

2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
60.0
59.0
63.0
68.0
69.0
45.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
56.0
79.0
76.0
77.0
82.0
84.0

…
…
…

5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
…
…
230.0
…
400.0
…
82.0
84.0
…
…

…
…

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-24)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS (thousands)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

2015 target = halt and begin to reverse prevalence of diseases
…
…
16.9
15.6
18.1
57.0
…
…
…
12.7
…
…
660.0
…
…
224.0
392.4
465.0
599.9
940.0
…
6.0
58.0
103.1
71.0

2. Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)
3. Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
4. Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12 months)

7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation (% of population)

7.6
...
...
9.4
83.0
55.0

8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (% of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

…
94.3
7.1

General indicators
Adult literacy rate (% of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 2/
Life expectancy at birth (years) 2/

…
3.3
61.9

2015 target = various 1
8.0
7.3
6.1
...
...
3.8
...
9.0
84.0
89.0
56.0
57.0

…
…
…
960.0
68.0

8.0
…
…
…
…
…

8.0
…
…
…
93.0
59.0

…
…
…
…
…
…

2015 target = various 1
…
44.2
...
116.0
302.3
825.1
28.1
66.4
84.6

...
889.0
…

45.0
...
...

...
...
...

89.0
3.0
51.0

82.4
3.1
58.0

85.2
…
48.5

...
2.8
47.7

Sources: World Bank and Statistics South Africa.
Note: In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
1/ For definitions of the goals, see http://ddp-ext.worldbank.org/ext/GMIS/gdmis.do?siteId=2&menuId=LNAV01HOME3.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOUTH AFRICA
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the
2010 Consultation with South Africa
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and Aasim Husain
June 23, 2010


Relations with the Fund. Describes financial and technical assistance by the
IMF and provides information on the safeguards assessment and exchange
system. South Africa has no outstanding purchases and loans from the Fund.



The JMAP Bank-Fund Matrix. Describes the priorities and main activities of
the World Bank Group and the IMF and areas of cooperation in their work with
the South African authorities.



Statistical Issues. Assesses the quality of statistical data. Economic data for
South Africa are generally of good quality and are provided to the Fund and the
public in a timely manner. South Africa subscribes to the SDDS and publishes all
data on the reserves template.

2
Contents

Page

I. Relations with the Fund ..........................................................................................................3
II. The JMAP Bank-Fund Matrix...............................................................................................6
III. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................................7

3
I. RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of May 31, 2009)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 12/27/1945; Accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement on September 15, 1973.

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
1,868.50
1,867.10
1.48

Percent Quota
100.00
99.92
0.08

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
1,785.42
1,788.15

Percent Allocation
100.00
100.15

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):

2010
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

Forthcoming
2011
2012
2012

2014

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

The South African rand floats against other currencies. South Africa maintains an exchange
system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions.
With the abolition of the financial rand in 1995, all exchange controls on nonresidents were
eliminated. Nonresidents are free to purchase shares, bonds, and other assets without
restriction and to repatriate dividends, interest receipts, and current and capital profits, as
well as the original investment capital. Foreign companies, governments and institutions may
list on South Africa’s bond and securities exchanges.

4
Since 1995, exchange controls on capital transactions by residents have also been relaxed.
Rather than completely liberalizing particular types of capital transactions, the authorities
have pursued a strategy of allowing an increasing array of transactions, with quantitative caps
applied to individuals and institutional investors which have been increased over time—most
recently in October 2009 and March 20101. Regarding outward foreign direct investment by
South African corporates, application to the South African Reserve Bank’s Exchange Control
Department is still required but the transactions limit was raised in 2009 from transactions
above R50 million a year to transactions above R500 million.
Prudential limits were introduced in 2003, and in 2008 the authorities initiated a process of
replacing direct exchange controls on local institutional investors with foreign exposure
prudential regulations and relaxing their foreign exposure limits.
Under the new system, the SARB monitors these investors’ foreign exposure through
quarterly reports, abolishing the previous pre-transaction authorization requests; however,
substantial changes in foreign exposure will still require pre-notification. Institutional
investors are permitted to invest in foreign securities, subject to an overall prudential limit of
20 percent of their total retail assets for retirement funds and the non-linked policies of longterm insurers. Investment managers registered as institutional investors for exchange control
purposes, linked policies of long-term insurers and collective investment schemes
management companies are restricted to 30 percent of total retail assets under management.
There is an additional allowance of 5 percent of assets for portfolio investment in Africa for
all institutional investors. In March 2010 the government finalized reporting measures for
macro-prudential foreign exposure limits on banks. South African banks will be able to
acquire direct and indirect foreign exposure up to 25 percent of their total liabilities
(excluding equity), covering all foreign exposure but excluding FDI. The initial limit of
40 percent was adjusted downwards in light of recent global financial market turbulence.
Corporates are not allowed to undertake foreign portfolio investment at present using locally
sourced capital. Corporates may, upon application, establish Dual Listed Company Structures
provided certain conditions are met. Their currency proceeds from exports must be
repatriated to South Africa but the 180-day rule was abolished in 2009. All local entities are
now allowed to participate in the rand futures market, enabling them to hedge and diversify
their portfolios.

1

Other quantitative arrangements are on applications which can be processed by banks R0 – R499 million or
the SARB at R500 million. These are not caps as there are no quantitative limits in investments abroad by
corporates only approval is necessary.

5
Private individuals are allowed to invest up to R4 million offshore. In addition to the above,
they can take out a further R750,000 a year as a documented discretionary allowance (gifts,
donations, travel, etc.). There are restrictions on the transfer of funds abroad by emigrants
(blocked funds). The transfer of blocked funds in excess of R4 million for individuals and
R 48 million for families is allowed, provided a 10 percent exit levy is paid. Large amounts
may be staggered to manage any impact on the foreign exchange market. Dividends and
interest payments on the blocked funds are freely transferable abroad.
VIII.

Article IV Consultations

The 2009 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on August 5, 2009.
South Africa is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle.
IX.

Technical Assistance

An FAD mission took place in 2003 to discuss with the National Treasury their draft royalty
bill. A monetary and financial statistics mission took place in 2003, followed up by a visit
during May–June, 2004.
In 2009, two STA missions took place to attend the meetings on the 57th ISI Conference and
the training on Coordinated Direct Investment Survey Seminar for Anglophone Africa.
Further two DFIDs took place in South Africa: (i) Management of Statistical Systems,
Agriculture, Health, and (ii) 57th Bi-Annual Session of the International Statistical Institute.
A number of LEG missions in 2007-09 assisted the authorities in the ongoing process of
rewriting the Income Tax Act and drafting a new Tax Administration Act. The most recent
LEG mission took place in November 2008, and a report on this mission was completed in
late 2009. LEG has submitted comments on the Tax Administration Act to the authorities by
email.

6
II. THE JMAP BANK-FUND MATRIX
Title
The World
Bank work
program in
the next
12 months
(to be
confirmed
with GOSA
in FY11
business
plan)

The Fund
work
program in
the next 12
months

Provisional
timing of
missions
A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
Products

Lending
ESKOM Renewable ($1.250b)
Ongoing Supervision
ESKOM Investment-SIL
CF Durban Landfill (FY04)
GEF Renewable Energy Market Transform (FY07)
GEF Great Addo SIL (FY04)
GEF Isimangaliso Wetland Park
GEF Richtersveld MSP SIL (FY01)
ESW
Analysis of Invest Climate/PSD Policy Notes
Closing Skills and Technology Gap
ESMAP Low Carbon
TA
Rural Development and Land Reform
Post Crisis SME Finance
Basel 2 (FSAP Follow-up)
Labor Intensive Industrial Development
TB and HIV/AIDS Program
Water and Transport Sector Dialogue
Urban Policy Dialogue
Climate change dialogue and Macro Modeling
Economic Development Dialogue
1. 2010 Article IV consultation report
- Background papers on a) quantitative effects of monetary
policy, b) labor markets and recent job shedding, c) cyclicality of
fiscal accounts and revenue performance, and d) a summary of
vulnerabilities of South Africa and other emerging market
economies to external developments.

FY11 Q3
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
7/30/2010
2/28/2011
9/30/2010
6/10/2010
2/1/2011
FY11 QTBD
FY11 QTBD
FY11 QTBD
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing

May 2010

2. Staff visit – preparatory work for the 2011 Article IV
consultation

Q4 2010

3. 2011 Article IV consultation

Q2 2011

4. LEG TA in rewriting the Income Tax Act and drafting a new
Tax Administration Act
Title
Fund
request to
Bank
Bank
request to
Fund

Products
B. Requests for work program inputs
Periodic update on progress on analytical work
Periodic updates on macroeconomic developments and
analytical work

Expected
delivery date

Board meeting
in July 2010

Board meeting
in July-August
2011
Ongoing

Provisional
timing of
missions

Expected
delivery date

7
III. STATISTICAL ISSUES
Data provided to the Fund are adequate for surveillance purposes. South Africa subscribed to
the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) on August 2, 1996 and is in observance of
specifications for coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of data, although using a flexibility
option on the timeliness and periodicity of unemployment data. A Report on Observance of
Standards and Codes—Data Module, Response by the Authorities, and Detailed Assessments
Using the Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF) was published on October 16, 2001.
Real sector
The national accounts are compiled according to the SNA 1993. In 2009, the base year of the
national accounts was changed from 2000 to 2005. At the same time, benchmarking was
undertaken to reflect more accurately the structure of the economy and to introduce other
methodological changes to the compilation of data. Reporting of real sector data for
International Financial Statistics (IFS) is timely.
Labor market statistics are published with lags of three months. Given the seriousness of the
unemployment problem, labor market analysis and policy design would benefit from better,
more frequent and timely labor market data. A new quarterly Labor Force Survey has been
conducted January 2008.
The consumer price index (CPI) covers all households living in metropolitan and urban areas,
which represent approximately 56 percent of the total number of households and 75 percent
of private consumption expenditures. The CPI weights are re-based in January 2009
according to the new weights published in July 2008. New price indices, which are re-based
to 2008=100, are calculated according to these weights published in July 2008. These indices
form the basis for calculating the year-on-year changes in the CPI for 2009 and the monthon-month change between December 2008 and January 2009 At the same time, Statistics
South Africa changed the way of measuring housing costs. The concept of owners’
equivalent rent are used to more accurately reflect the cost of the accommodation services
derived by owner occupiers from their own homes.

8
Government finance
Data are compiled and disseminated according to the GFSM 2001 framework. Data for social
security funds and central government’s extra budgetary funds have been reported on an
accrual basis, starting in 2000 and 2002, respectively. Starting in 2005, the authorities have
included additional noncash data, consistent with their migration to accrual accounting.
South Africa currently reports data for the consolidated general government for publication
in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. It also reports monthly data covering the
cash operations of the budgetary central government for publication in IFS.
Monetary statistics
Monetary statistics compiled by SARB are consistent with the methodology recommended in
the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual. South Africa regularly reports good quality
monetary statistics for publication in the IFS and the IFS Supplement, although there is room
for improving the timeliness of the data on non-depository financial institutions.
Balance of payments
Balance of payments data are broadly consistent with the fifth edition of the Balance of
Payments Manual (BPM5). The authorities are also working with their partners in the
Southern African Customs Union (SACU) to improve the coverage of intra-SACU trade
flows. Data reported for Direction of Trade Statistics differ substantially from external trade
data reported for IFS, particularly exports, due to balance of payments adjustments.
The banking sector holdings of foreign-currency assets have been removed from the official
measure of reserves, in accordance with international practice. Data on international reserves
position are disseminated in line with the requirements of the IMF’s template on international
reserves and foreign currency liquidity.
Net errors and omissions in the balance of payments are large, averaging 2 percent of GDP
during 2003–07. Work is ongoing to improve the reliability and accuracy of balance of
payments data.

9
SOUTH AFRICA: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(as of June 2, 2010)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
10
received

Exchange Rates

5/13/10

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the
1
Monetary Authorities

Frequen
cy of
7
Data

Frequency
of
7
Reporting

Frequency
of
publication

4/21/10

D

D

D

4/10

2/10

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

4/10

2/10

M

M

M

Broad Money

3/10

1/10

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

4/10

5/13/10

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of
the Banking System

3/10

5/17/10

M

M

M

4/10

5/11/10

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

4/10

5/13/10

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
3
and Composition of Financing –
4
General Government

FY 2008/09

4/30/08

A

S

S

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
3
and Composition of Financing –
Central Government

2/10

4/14/10

M

Q

Q

Stocks of Central Government
and Central Government5
Guaranteed Debt

Q1 2009

5/13/08

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account
Balance

Q4 2009

3/29/10

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods
6
and Services

Q4/09

3/29/10

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Q4 2009

3/26/10

Q

Q

Q

Gross External Debt

Q1 2009

Q4 2008

Q

Q

Q

International Investment Position

2009

2010

A

A

A

Interest Rates

1

2

7

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
8
soundness

Data Quality –
Accuracy and
9
reliability

O, O, LO, O

LO, O, O, O

O, LO, O, O

LO, LO, O, O

O, O, O, O

O, O, O, O

LO, LO, LO, LO

LO, LO, LO, LO

O, LO, LO, LO

LO, O, O, O

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Monthly data for goods. Goods and services are published quarterly on the same schedule as the rest of the balance of payments.
7
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC (October 2001) for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The
assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for
recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
9
Same as footnote 8, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment
and validation, and revision studies.
10
Reflects the latest information released by the Statistics Department on 06/02/2010.
2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOUTH AFRICA
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with South Africa
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and Aasim Husain
June 23, 2010

1.
South Africa’s external debt is projected to rise to 35 percent of GDP by 2015.
The increase in external debt by around 7 percentage points of GDP reflects the widening of
the current account deficit to above 7 percent of GDP from 2013–15 as growth recovers,
the import-intensive infrastructure investment program progresses, and dividend payments
abroad pick up again. The real effective exchange rate is also currently on the strong side
which, if sustained, is likely to contribute to a widening current account deficit. Although
the external debt level is rising it is increasing from a low level and given South Africa’s
deep domestic financial markets, a significant part of the deficit is expected to be
financed—as in the past—by nonresident portfolio flows, around 60 percent of which are
equities and nondebt creating. Portfolio inflows have been strong over the past twelve
months with net inflows amounting to around $15 billion, and recent turbulence in markets
has been accompanied by only small capital outflows from South Africa thus far. Part of the
public sector borrowing requirement is expected to be financed by nonresidents through
Eurobond issuance ($2 billion was raised in March 2010 and similar amounts are expected
in the next two years), purchases of domestic securities, and multilateral loans for
infrastructure.
2.
The rising external debt ratio makes it somewhat more vulnerable to external
shocks and rollover risk, although it looks manageable against a range of other shocks
(Figure 1). The stress tests indicate that the largest adverse impact is from a 30 percent
exchange rate depreciations or from a further widening of the non-interest current account
deficit by 1.5 percentage points on average over the next five years. These shocks could
respectively raise external debt to 47 percent and 43 percent by 2015. But these are likely to
be upper bound estimates, since, for example, the exchange rate is likely to have a positive
effect on export volumes which is not taken into account in the standard DSA. By contrast,
a large (one standard deviation) permanent adverse shock to real GDP growth and the
standard shock to interest rates have only a minor effect, while the combined shock has a
moderate effect on external debt levels. Rollover risk was relatively comfortable in 2009,

2
with reserves at 89 percent of the current account deficit plus short-term debt at remaining
maturity, but the position becomes tighter in the medium term.
3.
South Africa’s public debt position appears sustainable. Under the policies the
medium-term expenditure framework outlined in the 2010/11 budget, the ratio of
government debt to GDP is expected to rise over the short term, from 31 percent in 2009 to
a maximum of 39 percent in 2012—of which, close to 4 percent of GDP is expected to be
denominated in foreign currency—before declining gradually thereafter (Table 3). Gross
financing needs surge to close to 9 percent of GDP in 2010, but will gradually decline
afterwards to below 4 percent in the medium term (Figure 2). Total public debt is also
projected to rise in the short term, as public enterprise borrow to help finance the
accelerated investment expansion, but total public debt is projected to stabilize at close to
46 percent of GDP by 2012 (Table 3).
4.
The ratio of government debt-to-GDP ratio appears broadly robust to a variety
of shocks, including weaker GDP growth, a lower primary balance, a 30 percent real
depreciation of the exchange rate, and a 10 percent increase in the debt stock (Figure 2).
Under most of these scenarios, the government debt ratio rises above the baseline over the
projection period by only modest margins. The only exception is in the case of the “no
policy change” scenario where the debt ratio rises sharply and exceeds 50 percent of GDP at
the end of projection period, mainly owing to the recent sharp deterioration in fiscal
balance.

Table 1. South Africa: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005-2015
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

Baseline: External debt

18.7

21.8

26.3

25.9

27.5

26.5

28.2

29.9

31.8

33.6

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
35.2
-6.0

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

-1.8
-3.8
2.4
0.5
27.4
27.9
-5.1
-1.2
1.0
-1.0
-1.2
2.0

3.2
1.2
3.9
2.4
30.0
32.5
-2.7
-0.1
1.4
-1.0
-0.5
2.0

4.5
2.3
5.7
2.9
31.3
34.2
-2.7
-0.7
1.5
-1.1
-1.1
2.2

-0.4
4.6
5.4
3.0
35.5
38.5
-1.6
0.8
1.7
-1.0
0.1
-4.9

1.6
-1.2
2.4
0.9
27.1
28.0
-4.0
0.4
1.6
0.4
-1.6
2.8

-1.0
0.4
3.0
1.5
25.2
26.8
-3.4
0.8
1.5
-0.7
...
-1.4

1.7
1.6
4.7
3.4
25.4
28.8
-3.9
0.8
1.7
-0.9
...
0.1

1.7
1.4
4.9
3.5
25.5
29.0
-4.3
0.8
1.8
-1.0
...
0.3

1.9
0.4
5.1
3.6
25.8
29.3
-5.5
0.8
2.0
-1.2
...
1.4

1.8
0.4
5.2
3.6
26.0
29.5
-5.6
0.8
2.2
-1.3
...
1.3

1.7
0.3
5.2
3.7
26.1
29.8
-5.8
0.9
2.3
-1.4
...
1.3

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

68.3

72.8

84.2

73.2

101.5

105.0

111.2

117.2

123.4

129.3

134.9

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

24.5
9.9

33.8
12.9

41.6
14.5

51.7
18.7

36.6
12.8

49.2
14.2

41.7
11.8

58.7
15.7

56.9
14.5

61.5
14.8

69.7
15.8

26.5

24.2

22.6

22.2

21.7

21.2

3.2
16.4
6.5
11.8
15.1
-3.0
3.4

3.6
-0.7
6.7
3.5
10.6
-4.7
3.9

3.9
1.1
6.9
5.7
5.8
-4.9
4.3

4.2
1.2
7.0
6.5
6.6
-5.1
5.5

4.4
1.4
7.2
6.6
6.7
-5.2
5.6

4.5
1.4
7.4
6.7
6.8
-5.2
5.8

10-Year

10-Year

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/
Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

5.3
6.9
5.7
16.6
17.3
-2.4
5.1

5.6
0.2
7.7
15.9
23.2
-3.9
2.7

5.5
3.8
7.4
14.1
15.4
-5.7
2.7

3.7
-6.6
6.2
9.7
8.8
-5.4
1.6

-1.8
5.7
6.4
-20.6
-24.6
-2.4
4.0

3.6
5.5
6.3
9.6
11.7
-1.6
3.0

Standard
Deviation
2.2
18.0
0.8
14.1
18.1
3.0
2.1

-4.0

3

Historical
Average

1/ Derived as [r - g -  (1+g) +  (1+r)]/(1+g++g ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
 = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and  = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-(1+g(1+r1+g+ +g ) times previous period debt stock. increases with an appreciating domestic currency (> 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels

4
Figure 1. South Africa: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
50

20

50
45

45
40

Baseline
Historical
21

35
30

35

18

40
Baseline

35
16

25

i-rate
shock

30
25

20

14

15

35

36

20
15

10

12

5

10
5

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

10
2015

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Growth shock (in percent per year)
50

50

45

45
Growth
shock 36

40
35
30

Baseline

25

30

35

20
15

10

10

5

5
2009

2011

2013

Baseline 35

25

15

2007

2015

0
2005

Combined shock 2/

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Real depreciation shock 3/
55

50

30% depreciation

50

45

45

Comb
shock 40

40

43

35

20

0
2005

CA
shock

40

47

40

35

35

30

30

25

25

Baseline 35

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

0
2005

Baseline 35

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation
shocks. Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the
baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current
account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2010.

Table 2. South Africa: External Sustainability Framework--Gross External Financing Need, 2005-2015

2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012
2013

2014

2015

I. Baseline Projections

Gross external financing need in billions of U.S. dollars 1/
in percent of GDP

24.5
9.9

33.8
12.9

41.6
14.5

51.7
18.7

36.6
12.8

49.2
14.2

41.7
11.8

58.7
15.7

56.9
14.5

61.5
14.8

69.7
15.8

49.2

30.1

42.1

36.6

38.5

42.8

49.2
49.2
49.2
49.2
49.2

42.1
41.5
47.3
44.6
41.2

59.2
58.2
66.9
62.8
53.3

57.5
56.0
66.7
61.7
52.3

62.3
60.2
73.5
67.2
56.8

70.8
67.8
84.8
76.7
64.6

14.2

8.0

10.2

8.1

7.8

7.9

14.2
14.2
14.2
14.2
14.2

11.9
11.8
13.3
12.6
17.1

15.9
15.9
17.9
17.0
21.1

14.6
14.7
17.0
15.9
19.6

15.0
15.1
17.7
16.5
20.1

16.0
16.2
19.2
17.8
21.6

II. Stress Tests

Gross external financing need in billions of U.S. dollars 2/
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010-2015 3/
B. Bound Tests

Gross external financing need in percent of GDP 2/
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010-2015 3/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Nominal interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviations
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B3. Non-interest current account is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B4. Combination of B1-B4 using 1/4 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011

1/ Defined as non-interest current account deficit, plus interest and amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
2/ Gross external financing under the stress-test scenarios is derived by assuming the same ratio of short-term to total debt as in the baseline scenario and the same average maturity on medium- and long term
debt. Interest expenditures are derived by applying the respective interest rate to the previous period debt stock under each alternative scenario.
3/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
4/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.

5

B1. Nominal interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviations
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B3. Non-interest current account is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/4 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011

6
Table 3. South Africa: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007-15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2007

Actual
2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012 2013

2014

2015

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

28.3
3.8

27.2
4.3

30.8
3.9

34.8
3.8

37.7
3.8

39.1
3.8

38.8
3.9

37.8
3.9

34.8
3.1

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

-4.3
-6.6
-5.1
28.4
23.3
-1.5
-1.4
0.2
-1.6
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

-1.1
-3.8
-4.3
29.4
25.1
0.6
-0.8
0.1
-0.9
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.7

3.7
-0.4
-0.5
27.5
27.0
0.0
0.9
0.5
0.5
-0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.1

4.0
-0.6
-0.3
27.2
26.9
-0.2
-0.2
0.7
-0.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.6

2.9
-1.9
-1.5
27.8
26.3
-0.4
-0.4
0.7
-1.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.8

1.4
-3.6
-3.1
28.3
25.2
-0.5
-0.5
0.8
-1.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

-0.3
-5.4
-4.6
28.9
24.3
-0.8
-0.8
0.7
-1.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.1

-1.1
-6.4
-5.6
29.5
24.0
-0.8
-0.8
0.7
-1.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.3

-3.0
-7.3
-6.5
30.1
23.6
-0.8
-0.8
0.7
-1.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.3

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

99.6

92.4

112.1

2.5
7.0

3.5
9.7

8.3
23.9

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010-2015

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
-0.6

128.1 136.0 138.2 134.3 128.0 115.5
8.7
29.9

7.3
25.9

5.8
21.8

4.1
16.1

3.5
14.7

3.2
14.2

34.8
34.8

35.3
38.3

36.0
42.4

36.7
46.3

37.7
50.3

37.8
53.3

-0.2
-0.9

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in p
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in perc
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Memorandum items:
Debt of nonfinancial public enterprises
Debt of local governments and local enterprises
Gross public sector debt

5.5
9.2
1.0
2.3
8.2
8.1
-5.1

3.7
10.1
0.9
-26.8
9.2
11.5
-4.3

-1.8
9.8
1.7
26.1
8.0
5.9
-0.5

3.2
9.8
2.6
...
7.2
2.6
-0.3

3.6
9.7
2.6
...
7.2
1.3
-1.5

3.9
9.6
2.6
...
7.0
-0.2
-3.1

4.2
9.0
2.2
...
6.8
0.5
-4.6

4.4
8.8
2.3
...
6.5
2.8
-5.6

4.5
8.6
2.4
...
6.2
2.8
-6.5

1.5

1.3

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

4.9

5.5

5.7

5.6

5.5

5.3

5.1

4.9

4.7

34.6

34.0

37.9

41.9

44.6

45.8

45.3

44.0

40.8

1/ Includes the central government, and provincial and local government activities financed w ith transfers from the central government.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, w ith r = interest rate; p = grow th rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP grow th rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real grow th contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP grow th; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP grow th, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flow s) remain at the level of the last projection year.

7
Figure 2. South Africa: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
60
50

10

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

8
Baseline

40

60

50

Baseline:

2.4

Scenario:

3.3

Historical: 2.8

38

i-rate
shock

6
35
Historical

30

40

20
2

10
0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

0
2015

Primary
Growth
balance
shock
shock
(percent
(in percent
per year)
of GDP)

36

Baseline

4

35

30

20
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primarybalance)

60

60

50

50

No policy change
Growth
shock

40
Baseline

41
35

20
10
0
2005

2007

2009

Baseline:

4.1

Scenario:

3.1

Historical:

3.6

2011

2013

53

PB shock
38
35

40

Baseline

30

30

2015

20
10

2015

0
2005

2007

2009

Baseline:

4.3

Scenario:

3.5

Historical:

4.0

2011

2013

2015

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
60

60

50

Contingent liability
shock

50

44

Combined
shock

30 %
depreciation

39

40

40

37

Baseline
35

30

35

30

Baseline
20
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

20
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks.
Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being
presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2010,
with real depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local
currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/132
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 21, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation
with South Africa
On July 7, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with South Africa.1
Background
South Africa’s economic performance since the mid-2000s has been impressive.
Economic growth has picked-up quite perceptibly against the backdrop of sound
macroeconomic policy management and a favorable external environment. Tax
collections improved significantly, allowing the fiscal deficit to decline and fiscal policy to
be managed in a relatively counter-cyclical manner during the upswing. This in turn
allowed government debt to be reduced substantially to 28 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP) in 2007.
Growth started to slow down in early 2008, on account of the deteriorating external
environment, power shortages, and the impact of the South African Reserve Bank
(SARB)’s tightening cycle begun in mid-2006. The global financial crisis of late 2008
pushed an already slowing economy into its first recession since 1992. The economy
contracted for three consecutive quarters beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008 and
about 1 million jobs were lost since then.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
Playing off strongly counter-cyclical policies and the global recovery, South Africa’s
economy has emerged from recession since the third quarter of 2009, and growth
accelerated further to 4.6 percent in the first quarter of 2010, led by a rebound in the
export-oriented and interest-sensitive sectors—mining, manufacturing, and financial
services. From the demand side, however, private consumption growth remains anemic,
reflecting high levels of indebtedness, and with ample unutilized capacity, investment
growth is also weak. Consumer Price Index Inflation has stayed within the 3-6 percent
target band since February and stood at 4.8 percent in April 2010. The stock market and
the rand strengthened significantly through April from last year’s lows amid large capital
inflows. However, changes in global sentiment triggered by recent events in the euro
area, caused portfolio inflows to abate, the local stock market to wobble, and the rand to
weaken somewhat in May.
Fiscal policy has been strongly countercyclical. In the face of a large revenue shortfall in
fiscal year 2009/10 (April-March), the authorities continued to implement an ambitious
infrastructure investment program. This, together with a rapid increase in recurrent
expenditure, in particular, wages, led to the deterioration of the fiscal balance in terms of
GDP by 5.7 percentage points from 2008/09 to 2009/10. The fiscal year 2010/11 budget
announced in February 2010 outlined an ambitious fiscal consolidation path, targeting a
real growth of fiscal spending around 2-3 percent a year. Overall fiscal deficit is
expected to fall gradually to 2½ percent of GDP under the staff’s central growth forecast.
After a pause since August 2009, the SARB reduced the repo rate by another 50 basis
points in March 2010 in response to an improved inflation outlook, but has kept the repo
rate unchanged since then, citing broadly balanced risks to inflation outlook.
The South African financial sector weathered the global financial crisis without major
problems. There was no need for public support, and capital adequacy ratios remained
above their regulatory minima throughout the crisis period. Nevertheless, private sector
credit growth has turned negative in recent months, compared to growth of 20 percent
or so during 2005-2008. The recession has also led to a pronounced increase in
impaired loans in the banking system to 6 percent of gross loans and advances in
January 2010 from 4 percent in 2008. As a result, banks’ profitability declined, although
it remains positive, and the bank’s balance sheets have been shrinking.
South African continues to maintain a floating exchange rate regime. Without seeking to
influence the level of the nominal exchange rate, the SARB has been gradually buying
foreign exchanges in recent months when presented with the opportunities provided by
strong inflows. As of May 2010, gross international reserves stood at close to $42 billion,
equivalent to 98 percent the sum of short-term external debt and the projected current
account deficit in 2010.
The medium-term outlook is for the recovery to be sustained, provided that the global
recovery continues. Output growth is projected to be 3¼ percent in 2010, gradually
rising to 4½ percent over the medium term with the output gap expected to close by
around 2013. Inflation is also expected to remain within the target band over the
forecast horizon. The external current account, after narrowing temporarily in 2009, is
expected to widen over the medium term as private demand recovers and the public
investment programs continue to unfold.

3

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended South Africa’s impressive economic performance in
recent years, underpinned by prudent macroeconomic management, which provided
room for a decisive easing of monetary and fiscal policies during the crisis. In addition,
the banking system withstood the crisis without major problems, benefitting from a
strong supervisory framework. While economic activity is recovering, South Africa faces
several challenges. The overriding policy challenge is to reduce unemployment and
income inequality through labor and product market reforms aimed at raising the
country’s growth potential.
Directors agreed that the current medium-term fiscal consolidation plan strikes the right
balance between supporting the ongoing recovery and rebuilding fiscal space. They
welcomed the authorities’ intention to reduce the fiscal deficit through substantially lower
real spending growth. In particular, Directors stressed the importance of avoiding
another round of public sector wage increases exceeding inflation expectations and
productivity gains, which could jeopardize the fiscal targets and distort wage
negotiations in other sectors. Any revenue overperformance should be saved unless it is
directed toward urgent development spending.
Directors noted that the inflation-targeting framework has served South Africa well. They
agreed that inflation risks are evenly balanced and that the room for further rate cuts is
narrowing. In the current highly uncertain environment, the South African Reserve Bank
should nevertheless stand ready to move quickly in either direction. Directors welcomed
the authorities’ enhanced communication efforts surrounding monetary policy decisions,
noting that this could help induce forward-looking inflation expectations, dampening the
real cost of disinflation. They supported recent steps to integrate banking and financial
sector stability issues within the monetary policy decision making framework, and to
strengthen macro prudential analysis as part of a continued vigilant monitoring of
financial sector soundness.
Directors supported South Africa’s floating exchange-rate regime. They noted that the
exchange rate may be moderately overvalued, while acknowledging a wide range of
uncertainty surrounding this assessment. Directors saw merit in the authorities’ intention
of using the strong capital inflows to gradually build international reserves without
influencing the exchange rate level. Interventions to help small and medium enterprises
adversely affected by the strong rand should be transparent, time bound, and
performance-tested.
Directors welcomed ongoing initiatives to increase investment in infrastructure and
improve education and health services. They called for further far-reaching reforms to
raise growth and create employment. Directors underscored the need to strengthen
product market competition by stepping up the enforcement of competition policy,
continuing to reduce nontariff barriers to trade, as well as creating an environment
conducive for private sector participation in infrastructure projects. Continued
development of domestic financial markets should also be a priority. Noting the sharp
increase in unemployment resulting from the economic slowdown, Directors encouraged

4
the authorities to reexamine labor market institutions, in particular with a view to reduce
any policy distortions, and to ensure that businesses and unions have greater flexibility
in the wage bargaining framework.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2010 Article IV Consultation with South Africa is also available.

5

South Africa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–10
(Annual percent change; unless otherwise indicated)

Real GDP
CPI (metropolitan areas, annual average)
1,2
CPIX (end of period)
Unemployment rate (percent)
Broad money 2
National government budget balance (percent of GDP) 3
3
National government debt (percent of GDP)
External current account balance (percent of GDP)
External debt (percent of GDP)
Gross reserves (SARB, in months of next year's total imports)
International liquidity position of SARB (in billions of U.S.
dollars) 2
2
U.S. dollar exchange rate (rand per U.S. dollar)

2006

2007

2008

2009

5.6
4.7
5.0
25.5
22.5
0.4
32.6
-5.3
21.8
3.1

5.5
7.1
8.6
22.7
23.6
0.8
28.3
-7.2
26.3
3.7

3.7
11.5
10.3
21.9
14.8
-0.6
27.2
-7.1
25.9
5.1

-1.8
7.1
6.3
24.3
1.6
-5.3
30.8
-4.0
27.5
5.2

2010
proj.
3.2
5.6
5.8
24.8
19.2
-6.1
34.8
-4.5
28.0
5.0

23.0
6.97

30.2
6.81

31.9
9.31

37.5
7.38

40.8
8.08

Sources: South African Reserve Bank; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff projections.
1

Since January 2009, a reweighed and rebased CPI replaced the previously used CPIX (the consumer price index excluding
the interest on mortgage loans) as the targeted measure of inflation.
2
End of period.
3
Calendar year.

Statement by Mr. Itam on South Africa
July 5, 2010
Introduction
My South African authorities would like to thank staff for the useful discussions held for
the 2010 Article IV Consultation. The staff report provides a well-balanced assessment of
the South African economy. Like many emerging economies, South Africa faces
challenging times in the aftermath of the crisis, and my authorities value the continued
close dialogue with the Fund in their efforts to address these challenges.
The impact of the crisis and recent economic developments
South Africa’s economy has been affected more severely by the global financial crisis
than a number of other emerging markets. The global contraction has adversely affected
the mining, manufacturing and trade sectors through lower commodity prices, falling
exports and slowing domestic demand. The resulting recession has caused a huge setback
on the employment numbers, with the unemployment rate rising sharply.
The recovery in economic activity, however, has not yet materialized in generating net
employment and the unemployment rate in the first quarter of 2010 rose further to 25.2
percent. Conditions in the labour market remain subdued owing mainly to the
uncertainties surrounding the recovery in economic activity.
Consumption expenditure by households also picked up strongly facilitated by
acceleration in the growth rate of real disposable income, relatively low interest rates and
inflation, positive wealth effects, and an improvement in household confidence. The
rising demand for exports and generally buoyant commodity prices have resulted in a
notable acceleration in economic activity generating growth rate of 4.6 percent. This
growth was widespread among the major economic sectors, with manufacturing playing a
strong role alongside mining and commerce. Capacity utilisation nevertheless remained
at low levels.
Private investment growth, edged lower, although at a slower pace than the contractions
observed during 2009. Capital expenditure increases by the private sector in areas such as
construction, telecommunications and accommodation, partly related to the expected
influx of tourists during the 2010 FIFA World Cup tournament, was offset by lower
capital outlays in agriculture, mining and manufacturing. However, public corporate
investment in the areas of transport, electricity and telecommunications infrastructure
helped to more than offset the declines recorded by the general government and private
sectors.
The recession and sluggish recovery of domestic demand helped narrow the current
account deficit, which was easily financed by ample portfolio capital inflows in late
2009. However, as improvement in the domestic economy and stronger rand boosted

2
import demand and weakness in the Euro zone slowed exports, the external current
account deficit widened significantly. The stable economic environment in the country,
alongside well-developed and liquid financial markets, facilitated a further strong net
inflow of portfolio capital in the first quarter of 2010, mainly in the form of debt
securities. However, this inflow started to weaken in the wake of concerns regarding
fiscal sustainability in Greece and a number of other European countries. In contrast,
flows of direct and other investment capital remained fairly subdued over the period.
My authorities remain concerned about the current account deficit, and acknowledge the
case made in the staff paper that there are vulnerabilities from the volatile portfolio flows
and strengthening rand. But the mitigating factors, such as equity flows, as investor
interest in emerging markets returns, the floating exchange rate and the low external debt
should limit the impact.
Fiscal policy response
Prudent fiscal management, maintained over the last l0 years, created fiscal space which
enabled the authorities to mitigate the impact of the crisis with a strong counter-cyclical
policy. In the ensuing crisis, expenditure levels were maintained, allowing the budget
deficit to widen further in fiscal 2009/10 as tax revenue receded on account of the
comparatively subdued levels of economic activity. The policy was aimed at guarding
against a reversal of the hard won improvements in living standards achieved during the
past decade; cushioning the impact of slower growth and job losses on the poor; and
sustaining the public infrastructure investment program, particularly those related to
easing electricity supply constraints and transport bottlenecks.
The current fiscal plan remains to strike a balance between supporting the ongoing
recovery through sustained infrastructure investment, which should strengthen the longterm growth potential of the economy and lower the cost of economic activity, and
building fiscal space. Most recently there were signs of a moderate increase in tax
collections as the economic recovery gains traction, which should help narrow the fiscal
deficit.
The recent increase in the public sector wages should be ascribed to one-off pay
adjustments, made in accordance with the occupation-specific dispensation and including
an element of back pay. The intention of this dispensation is to improve government’s
ability to attract and retain appropriately skilled employees through improved
remuneration by recognising improved skills and accumulated work experience.
Monetary developments
Low global inflation, the appreciation in the external value of the rand and progress made
in containing production costs helped to restrain inflationary pressures in the domestic
economy in the first quarter of 2010. Furthermore, the consistent implementation of
monetary policy played a role in suppressing the high level of inflation. As a result,

3
inflation fell within the target range. The lower inflation outcome also contributed to a
moderation in inflation expectations.
Since the first reduction in the policy rate in December 2008, the repurchase rate has been
lowered by a cumulative 550 basis points. Among other factors, a large output gap,
modest pace of growth in domestic expenditure, and relatively stable international oil
prices have contributed to the improved inflation outlook. These developments have
created monetary policy space for the SARB to support the domestic economy through
interest rate cuts. Since the inflation outlook had remained broadly unchanged, SARB in
its May 2010 Monetary Policy Committee meeting decided to keep the policy rate
unchanged at 6.5 percent. My authorities consider that inflation targeting remains the
operational framework for conducting monetary policy and they stand ready to move
quickly to use the instruments at their disposal to ensure that inflation expectation remain
within the band.
Labor market
The high and persistent unemployment level remains a key challenge. This problem has
been exacerbated by the recent financial and economic crisis. To address this issue,
economic policies are focusing on raising the long-term growth potential of the economy
and the labour intensity of economic activities. To this end, the authorities are making a
concerted effort to reduce joblessness among young people through carefully designed
initiatives. These include support for labour-intensive industries through industrial policy
interventions, skills development, public employment programmes, information services
and a rural development strategy.
Conclusion
The key challenges remain creating jobs and reducing poverty. The strength of present
policy response in the face of deterioration in economic activity and higher uncertainties
in the global economy underline the authorities’ continued commitment to put South
Africa on a path to sustained economic growth.

