December 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/344

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

September 3, 2010
July 16, 2010

September 17, 20 January 29, 2001
10
2010
January 29, 2001

Thailand: 2010 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Thailand
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2010 Article IV consultation with Thailand, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2010 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 16, 2010, with the officials of Thailand on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on September 3, 2010. The views expressed in the staff report
are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of
the IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its September 17, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.



A statement by the Executive Director for Thailand.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

International Monetary Fund

Thailand

September 3, 2010

Thailand: Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation1
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with Thailand
Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Aasim Husain
Key Issues and Recommendations


Growth outlook: Thailand has made a remarkable comeback from the global crisis and a
round of domestic political turmoil. Led by strong export performance, growth is likely to
reach 7½ percent in 2010, before easing to 4 percent in 2011. Risks to these projections are to
the downside, as the global recovery remains fragile, while political uncertainty could
continue to weigh on domestic demand.



Strengths and weaknesses: Thailand’s resilience is a testimony to its skillful economic
management and the strengths built over the past decade. But the crisis has also underscored
its structural weaknesses, which have slowed growth and left it dependent on exports.



Exit policies: With the economy recovering, the authorities are normalizing the policy stance,
winding back fiscal deficits and beginning to raise interest rates. Since policy rates are far
from neutral, significant adjustments will eventually be needed. Given the downside risks,
however, normalization should proceed gradually, as evidence accumulates that the recovery
is becoming entrenched. Should volatile capital flows intensify, the exchange rate should be
allowed to serve as a buffer, reinforced if necessary by prudential measures.



Medium-term strategy: The authorities aim to rejuvenate Thailand’s growth potential by
alleviating constraints on economic activity, notably by building out the country’s
infrastructure and developing its financial sector.



Infrastructure: Generating the needed budgetary resources will be a challenge. The
emergency crisis subsidies could be withdrawn, and an expenditure review could identify
further sources of savings. There is also scope to widen the corporate and personal income tax
bases by reducing exemptions and deductions. And the VAT rate could be raised from its
current relatively low level of 7 percent.



Financial sector: Effective implementation of the master plans for the banking sector and
capital markets would inject new life into the system, by generating greater competition and
introducing new services. At the same time, steps should be taken to revamp the framework
for specialized financial institutions, where nonperforming loans have been proliferating.

––––––––––––
1
Discussions took place July 5–16. The staff team comprised Messrs. Felman, Kalra, and Yoshida, and
Ms. Oner (all APD), and Mr. Goldsworthy (FAD). Ms. Vongpradhip and Mr. Kanithasen (OED) also
attended meetings.

2
Contents
I.

Page

Background .........................................................................................................................3
A. A Remarkable Comeback ..............................................................................................3
B. A Slowing Dynamo ........................................................................................................7

II. Short Term: Heading for the Exit .....................................................................................10
III. Medium Term: Dynamic Thailand, Regained? ................................................................13
A. Outlook and Overall Strategy ......................................................................................13
B. Expanding Infrastructure: Mind the Gap .....................................................................14
C. Developing the Financial Sector ..................................................................................17
IV. Staff Appraisal ..................................................................................................................19
Boxes
1. Calibrating Monetary Policy in Thailand .........................................................................22
2. How Do Capital Flows to Thailand Compare With the Region? .....................................23
3. Assessment of Real Exchange Rate and International Reserves ......................................24
Figure
1. Anatomy of a Recovery ......................................................................................................4
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–11...........................................................................25
2. General Government Operations, 2006/07–2010/11 ........................................................26
3. Balance of Payments, 2007–15.........................................................................................27
4. Monetary Survey, 2007–10 ..............................................................................................28
5. Financial Sector Indicators, 2005–10 ...............................................................................29
6. Medium-Term Framework, 2007–15 ...............................................................................30
7. Medium-Term Fiscal Scenario, 2008/09–2014/15 ...........................................................31
Appendices
1. Public and External Debt Sustainability ...........................................................................32

3

I. BACKGROUND
1.
Over the course of last year, the
Thai economy has demonstrated a
paradoxical mix of strengths and
weaknesses. Its strength was shown in its
rapid rebound from the global crisis. But its
weakness was also underscored: the loss of
its former dynamism, which has slowed
trend growth and left it largely dependent
on exports. In the short term, the key policy

challenge will be to ensure that the nascent
recovery matures into a sustained
expansion. Over the longer term, the task
will be to address the structural
weaknesses, so that the economy can be
placed on a more dynamic growth path.
The 2010 Article IV consultation
consequently focused on these two issues.

A. A Remarkable Comeback
A year ago, the global crisis had left
Thailand’s economy mired in deep
recession. Then, in mid-2010, the nation was
shaken by a violent political confrontation.
Despite these profound shocks, a vibrant
economic recovery has nonetheless taken
hold, with growth for 2010 likely to reach
7½ percent. As a result, Thailand’s stock
market has outperformed the region. How
did this happen?
Stock Market Performance
(Index; January 1, 2008 =100, as of September 2, 2010)
120
Thailand

MSCI EM Asia (local currency)

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
Jan-08
Feb-08
Mar-08
Apr-08
May-08
Jun-08
Jul-08
Aug-08
Sep-08
Oct-08
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
Jan-10
Feb-10
Mar-10
Apr-10
May-10
Jun-10
Jul-10
Sep-10

40

Source: Bloomberg LP.

2.
The Thai economy has been
emerging from two severe tests. The first
test came when global trade collapsed
following Lehman’s failure in September
2008. This collapse had profound
consequences for one of the world’s most

open economies, where exports account for
over 60 percent of GDP. As export order
books dried up, firms were forced to shelve
their investment plans and furlough
workers. And as workers saw their incomes
shrink, they were forced to scale back their
consumption. All this extracted a serious
toll on the economy, causing output to
shrink by 7 percent year-on-year by the
first quarter of 2009.
3.
Then, just as the economy was
beginning to recover from this shock,
politics intervened. In March 2010, a large
political protest started in Bangkok, which
stretched on until the end of May,
periodically leading to outbreaks of
violence. As a result, confidence was badly
shaken and tourist arrivals, which generate
about 6 percent of GDP, plunged.
Yet the economy was able to
4.
absorb these blows—and stage a
remarkable comeback. The recovery
began in the second quarter of 2009,
narrowly and tentatively. By the first
quarter of 2010, it had progressed to the
point where GDP had surpassed its
previous peak. The political turmoil then
slowed the momentum, but the

4
economy continued to advance. So, by the
third quarter of 2010 it seemed that a
sustainable recovery was taking hold.
5.
What explains this remarkable
resilience? To begin with, global trade
began to revive in early 2009, thereby
restarting Thailand’s main economic engine
(Figure 1). As a result, Thailand’s exports
started to soar, even as imports remained
depressed, pushing the current account from
near balance into a 7¾ percent of GDP
surplus in 2009. Vigorous export demand
continued to propel growth in 2010 even
during the March-May political
disturbances, because the industrial estates
and ports were located far from the protest
zone, allowing firms to fill orders without
difficulty. And as the export earnings
coursed through the economy, domestic
demand began to revive, transforming the
upturn into a broad-based expansion. Then,
as political prospects improved after May,
the recovery became further entrenched.
6.
Another factor behind Thailand’s
recovery was its forceful policy response.
Years of fiscal prudence and credible
monetary management (reinforced by an
inflation targeting framework) provided
ample space for decisive action. The Bank
of Thailand (BOT) cut its policy rate by
250 basis points to a historically low level
of 1¼ percent, providing relief to those
who had borrowed and suddenly found that
the revenues needed to service their debts
were disappearing. Meanwhile, the
government swiftly introduced a sequence
of stimulus packages. The first package
focused squarely on putting spending
power in the hands of the population, partly
through direct cash transfers, partly by
waiving charges, such as the cost of
electricity and water, for the poor. The
second package expanded spending to

include investment projects, particularly on
infrastructure. Together, they imparted an
estimated stimulus of 3 percent of GDP in
the two fiscal years since 2007/2008.1
Overall Primary Balance
(In percent of GDP)
4
All emerging markets
Asia emerging markets
Asia excluding China and India
Thailand

3
2
1
0
-1

Projection

-2
-3
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and staff calculations.

The most fundamental
7.
explanation for Thailand’s rapid
recovery, however, lies in its sound
economic framework. The country entered
the global crisis from a position of financial
strength, on all sides—bank, corporate, and
public. So, when the stress arrived, these
sectors were able to withstand the blow.
More than that, depositors proved so
confident in banks, banks in firms, and
firms in their future that remarkably little
adjustment took place. Large firms instead
merely furloughed workers, ran down their
cash balances and secured credit while they
waited for export orders to revive.
Meanwhile, smaller firms and farmers
turned to the state-owned Specialized
Financial Institutions (SFIs) for support.2
So, once the orders came back, they were
ready to resume export production. And as
this happened, the impetus quickly fed
through
1

Thailand’s fiscal year runs from October 1 through
September 30.

5
Figure 1. Thailand: Anatomy of a Recovery
The pickup in global demand for electronics starting
early 2009…

…helped revive manufacturing production.

Then, in March-May 2010 a violent political protest
shook consumer and business confidence….

…but failed to derail the recovery. To the contrary,
booming exports fed into consumption...

…and into investment, broadening the base of the
expansion.

Headline inflation has accelerated, while core
inflation remains low.

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; Bloomberg L.P.; Bank of Thailand; and IMF staff calculations.

6

to domestic demand, in stark contrast to
some advanced countries, where the
―
transmission mechanism‖ was broken
because households and financial
institutions were beset by balance sheet
problems.
8.
This fundamental strength was
the legacy of a decade of effort following
the Asian crisis, aimed at building a
stable and robust economy. On the
banking side, the BOT’s Financial Sector
Master Plan successfully consolidated the
banking sector, producing larger institutions,
with high capital adequacy ratios, good
profitability, and strong risk management
systems. On the corporate side, firms reacted
to the painful lessons of 1997 by reducing

Corporate Leverage

Stability Indicators

Bank vulnerability 1/

their leverage to much lower levels and
placing a greater focus on profitability,
rather than market share. Meanwhile, the
government shifted the budget into surplus,
thereby reducing public sector debt to
37 percent of GDP. More broadly, prudent
policies curbed macroeconomic imbalances
that had arisen in the 1990s: large current
account deficits were turned into small
surpluses, international reserves were
boosted to ample levels, and inflation was
reduced to low levels. All of this proved
invaluable in ensuring that the economy was
able to weather the global crisis. Epitomizing
this success, during 2009 banks’
nonperforming loan ratio actually declined—
and profits actually increased.

(In percent of equity)
Inflation (in percent)
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

1990‒1996

200

2001‒2007

180

174

160

Corporate
vulnerability 2/

140
120
100

82

80
60
40
20

CA deficit

Public debt 3/

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Inverse of capital adequacy ratio, 1997‒2000 vs. 2001-‒07 average.
2/ Inverse Altman Z-score. 2001 vs. 2008.
3/ 1999 vs.2008, in percent of GDP, divided by 10.

0
1996

1996

2007

Source: IMF, Corporate Vulnerability Utility database.

––––––––––
2

While this approach helped sustain the economy during
the downturn, the rapid expansion of SFI loans
(20 percent in 2009) is likely to aggravate the
nonperforming loan problem at these institutions. See
Section III.C below.

7
B. A Slowing Dynamo
9.
But while the economy has
become more stable, it has lost much of
its former dynamism. During the early
1990s, Thailand benefitted from a
remarkable economic boom. Foreign
capital poured into the country, helping to
transform a traditionally agricultural land
into a sizeable industrial exporter. In
tandem, the country’s infrastructure was
expanded rapidly, building up the facilities,
roads, and other networks needed to
support the industrial development. As a
result, in the seven years from 1990 to
1996, investment reached 40 percent of
GDP, propelling economic growth to
8½ percent per year, one of the fastest rates
in the world. Yet during the 2000s, the
story was quite different: in the seven years
ending 2007, growth averaged just 5
percent.

inevitable, since part of 1990s investment
boom was fueled by excess leverage and an
undue disregard of risk. But some of the
decline may have been excessive. Estimates
suggest that even before the global crisis,
investment had fallen to levels that were
insufficient to sustain the capital-output
ratio, implying that potential growth was
actually falling.
Investment
(Average for the period, in percent of GDP)
45
41
40
35
30
26
25
20
15
10
5
0
1990-1996

Actual and Potential Growth

2001-2007

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.

(Average for the period, in percent)
10
9
8

Real GDP growth

8.6
7.5

Potential growth

7
6

5.1

5

4.6

4
3
2
1
0
1990-96

2001-07

Source: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations.

10.
What happened? The external
environment was hardly to blame: global
growth was actually faster during the early
2000s than it was a decade earlier. Rather,
the problem lay in the sharp deceleration in
investment, which fell to around 25 percent
of GDP, even amidst the mid-decade global
boom. Some of this deceleration was

11.
Why did investment fall so
sharply? Several factors seem to have been
at play. One was the erosion of Thailand’s
competitive position in the global economy.
As the country moved firmly into the ranks
of middle-income countries, its attraction as
a production base diminished, for it no
longer had the low wages needed to export
inexpensive goods (as in Vietnam), nor did
it have the domestic market of more
populous countries such as China and
Indonesia. In other words, the country fell
into the ―
middle-income trap‖.
12.
A second factor was a rise in risk
aversion, linked to political uncertainty.
All across the region, businesses became
much more risk averse after the Asian
crisis, and scaled back their expansion

8
plans accordingly. In most other countries,
risk appetite gradually revived, especially
after the global economy began to boom in
2003. But in Thailand, firms became even
more cautious because political uncertainty
increased, with power shifting between the
two major political camps three times in the
past four years. As a result, after 2005 both
investment and consumption slowed
sharply, as did the manufacturing
production for domestic demand.

The product of these two trends was a
steadily declining share of wage income in
overall GDP, undercutting consumption
and the incentive to invest for the domestic
market.
Real Consumption
(Year-on-year percent growth, average for the period)
9

8

8
7
6

4.6

5

Production for External and Domestic

4

Markets1

(2000=100)

3

250

2

MPI High tech exports
MPI Labor intensive exports
MPI for domestic demand
of which Labor Intensive Exports
MPI for export
MPI for Export (2000=100)

1

of which High Tech Exports

200

0

1990-1996

MPI for Domestic Demand (2000=100)

150

2001-2007

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

100

Wages and Salaries

50

(In percent of NDP)
42

0
2000

2003

2006

2009

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Manufacturing Production Index (MPI).

41
40
39

13.
A third factor was the gradual
erosion of the domestic market. During
the 1990s, Thailand’s domestic market was
extraordinarily vibrant, with consumption
growing by 8 percent per year. But in the
2000s, consumption decelerated, with the
growth rate falling to just 4½ percent,
below overall GDP growth. One reason is
that much of the economic growth during
the past decade did not flow through into
workers’ incomes. With Thailand having
reached middle-income status, the
industrial sector began to shift towards
more advanced and capital intensive
activities––electronics and cars, rather than
textiles––which meant that growth created
relatively few jobs in the formal sector. At
the same time, labor continued to shift out
of agriculture, and from rural areas to urban
ones, putting downward pressure on wages.

38
37
36
35
34
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: National Economic and Social Development Board of Thailand.

14.
At the same time, incomes
became increasingly skewed
geographically. With much of Thailand’s
economy oriented around exports,
production naturally clustered close to
Bangkok and the ports, on the eastern
seaboard. And well-paying jobs tended to
concentrate around these regions as well.
Consequently, during the 2000s, income
per capita in the eastern region increased
40 percent faster than the economy as a

9
example, by looking at firms’ external
funding ratios, that is, the share of
financing they have been able to secure
from outside sources, such as banks or the
stock market. Compared to a sample from
Korea, Malaysia, and Taiwan Province of
China, listed Thai firms are not able to
obtain as much external funding for their
projects. And unlisted SMEs find it even
more difficult to obtain the funding needed
to grow: banks are reluctant to lend to
them, since there are hardly any venture
capital or microfinance firms to provide it.
Consequently, very few have been able to
graduate to the stock market.

whole, surpassing even Bangkok.
Meanwhile incomes in most other regions
remained less than one-third of the
Bangkok level. As a result, much of the
population was unable to secure the
purchasing power needed to sustain a
dynamic consumer market. In addition, the
regional disparities contributed to the
political tensions.
Thailand: Regional GDP
(Per capita, thousand baht, 2007-08 average)
Northeastern

Northern
Southern
Western

Size of Financial Markets, 2008

Central

(In percent of GDP)

Bangkok and
Vicinity

800

Eastern

700

0

100

200

600

300

Debt securities (private)
Debt securities (public)
Stock market capitalization
Bank assets

500

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.

400

15.
Finally, financial constraints also
seem to have played a role in depriving
Thailand of its dynamism. While the
financial sector has become more stable, its
development has languished, rendering it
too small to service the economy
adequately. Stock market capitalization
used to be commensurate with the
country’s status as the second-largest
economy in ASEAN, but it has now slipped
to the fourth rank. And the bond market
remains very small. Meanwhile, the bank
credit/GDP ratio, while higher than in some
neighboring countries, has fallen steadily in
recent years. In part, the shrinkage of the
financial sector merely reflects the
declining need for finance, as investment
rates have subsided. But staff research
suggests that the causality has also run the
other way, with credit constraints inhibiting
investment.3 One can see the problem, for

300
200
100
0
IDN PHP IND CHL NZL THA CHN KOR AUS MYS USA SGP TWN JPN
Source: Bankscope; Bloomberg LP; and IMF staff estimates.

16.
The Thai authorities
consequently now face major challenges.
They will need to nurse the recovery into a
sustained expansion during what may prove
to be a difficult period ahead. They will
also need to find a way to regain at least
some of the country’s lost dynamism. And
they need to do this in a less buoyant global
environment, amidst considerable political
uncertainty. This will not be easy.
––––––––––––
3

Kalra and Oner, Thailand: The Corporate Sector,
Financial Sector Development and Rebalancing, paper
presented at the Bank of Thailand-IMF Conference on
Rebalancing, Bangkok, April, 2010, manuscript.

10

II. SHORT TERM: HEADING FOR THE EXIT
The immediate challenge facing the
authorities is to navigate the recovery
through a thicket of uncertainty. How should
policymakers respond?
Outlook
17.
Over the short term, Thailand
should benefit from some further
economic normalization. In particular,
rising project incentive applications suggest
that investment will continue to climb back
to its pre-crisis level—and beyond. This
process should buoy the economy over the
next few quarters, lifting this year’s growth
to 7½ percent.
18.
But after normalization runs its
course––externally as well as
domestically––the recovery will
inevitably slow. Indeed, the global
economy has already begun to downshift,
as the boost from inventory accumulation
and policy stimulus begins to wind down.
Even so, under the IMF’s baseline scenario,
the global expansion should still continue at
a healthy rate of 4½ percent. Moreover,
global demand for electronics, which is
particularly important to Thailand, is still

expanding briskly. As a result, Thailand
should be able to grow at 4 percent next
year, with continued low inflation.
Meanwhile, with domestic demand
recovering, the current account
surplus/GDP ratio should fall by more than
half, to 3½ percent of GDP.
19.
That said, there are downside
risks. Final demand in advanced countries
could slow from its current pace, under the
weight of balance sheet problems in the
financial, household, and public sectors.
A sharp slowdown in China––Thailand’s
largest trading partner—would also be a
concern. Finally, political uncertainty could
take a more serious and longer-lasting toll
on domestic demand.
Strategy
20.
With the economy normalizing,
the authorities are starting to normalize
the policy stance. After two years of fiscal
stimulus, disbursements from the offbudget second stimulus package are
scheduled to fall by nearly 2 percent of
GDP next fiscal year, as the special bond
funding authority nears exhaustion. But

11
part of the stimulus measures will be
transferred to the regular budget, reducing
the estimated withdrawal to a manageable
1 percent of GDP. The overall public sector
deficit should also fall by the same amount,
to a projected 3½ percent of GDP.
21.
Meanwhile, the Bank of Thailand
has initiated the monetary normalization
process. Since July, it has raised interest
rates twice, by a cumulative 50 basis
points, bringing the policy rate to
1¾ percent. So far, inflation pressures have
been minimal: the headline rate in August
was just 3¼ percent year-on-year, core
inflation 1¼ percent year-on-year, and in
both cases base effects were at play.
Looking ahead, staff forecasts suggest that
inflation pressures should remain subdued.
Still, there is some cause for concern. The
rapid rebound means that the economy is
quickly approaching its potential. Staff
estimates suggest that the output gap will
close somewhere between the first quarter
of 2010 (meaning it has already happened)
and the end of the year. Yet the policy rate
is still far below its normal level of around
4‒5 percent. It also remains the lowest in
the region, both in nominal and real terms.
Policy Interest Rates, August 2010
7
Nominal Policy Rate

6

Real Policy Rate1

5
4

3
2
1
0
Thailand

Indonesia

-1
-2
-3
Source: Bloomberg LP; CEIC Data Co. Ltd.
1/ Using year-on-year headline inflation.

Philippines

Malaysia

Staff views
22.
The staff endorsed the
authorities’ strategy of normalizing the
policy stance. Given the baseline scenario,
it was appropriate to plan on gradually
winding back the fiscal deficits as the
recovery proceeds. Meanwhile, monetary
policy—as the more flexible
macroeconomic tool―could be used to
calibrate the stance to any contingencies
that may arise.
23.
In accordance with this strategy,
staff and the authorities agreed that
despite the large distance to normal, rate
adjustments should proceed gradually.
To assess the appropriate path, a Taylor
rule was estimated for Thailand,
incorporating two factors that are
particularly important at the current
juncture: the impact of advanced countries
maintaining low interest rates for a
prolonged period, and the impact of
uncertainty about the economic outlook.
(Box 1). The estimates suggest that
achieving a 5 percent rate might
appropriately take until late 2011.
24.
A potential complication to this
strategy could come from capital flows.
So far in the recovery, inflows to Thailand
have remained modest (Box 2). Nor are
there any signs of asset price inflation, with
property prices in particular remaining
around year-ago levels. But there is a risk
that the ―
multispeed‖ global recovery could
lead to large inflows, as investors from
advanced markets seek higher returns in
faster-growing economies. A rise in
Thailand’s interest rates could only
intensify this attraction. Alternatively, if
worries about advanced countries cause a

12

25.
Should volatility intensify, the
exchange rate could be allowed to serve
as a buffer, appreciating during periods
of inflows and depreciating during
outflows. In the case of outflows, some
additional measures might prove necessary
to provide liquidity, but the experience
from September 2008 suggests these would
be modest, since the financial system’s
dependence on wholesale funding
(especially external funding) is minor and
exposure to toxic assets negligible. More
problematic could be the case of sustained
inflows, which could threaten to create
asset bubbles. In such circumstances, the
BOT could take prudential measures, such
as reducing maximum loan-to-value ratios
on property loans, as it has done in the past.
Further liberalization of capital outflows
could also be helpful.
26.
Of course, whether greater
exchange rate appreciation is acceptable
depends on whether competitiveness is
currently adequate. But it is hard to make
the case that exchange rate trends are the
cause of Thailand’s loss of dynamism.
Admittedly, the country’s real effective
exchange rate has appreciated substantially
in recent years. But the gain has been
almost exactly in line with its ASEAN
peers, and has come off a depressed postAsian crisis base. Moreover, the stability of
Thailand’s export market share, and its
success in penetrating the competitive
Chinese market, suggests that
competitiveness remains adequate. Finally,
IMF multilateral assessments suggest that
the baht is close to equilibrium, on all three
model-based estimates (Box 3).

Real Effective Exchange Rate
(2000=100)
130
125

Thailand
ASEAN-5 excl. Thailand

120
115
110
105
100
95

90

2000M1
2000M7
2001M1
2001M7
2002M1
2002M7
2003M1
2003M7
2004M1
2004M7
2005M1
2005M7
2006M1
2006M7
2007M1
2007M7
2008M1
2008M7
2009M1
2009M7
2010M1

renewed bout of risk aversion, capital
outflows could reemerge.

Source: IMF, INS database.

27.
Another consideration relates to
the level of reserves. Over the past few
years, Thailand has accumulated reserves at
a steady pace, even during the global crisis
of 2009. As a result, reserve assets have
now reached levels that are more than
ample by most metrics. There is
consequently little insurance benefit from
responding to inflows by accumulating
additional reserves, and more rationale to
allow the exchange rate to adjust.
Authorities’ views
28.
The Bank of Thailand noted that
there were other reasons for beginning
the normalization process, beyond those
noted by staff. To begin with, core
inflation was not fully reflecting the
underlying pressures, since prices of a large
number of items were still being controlled,
as part of the crisis response measures. As
the recovery proceeded, these controls
would be lifted, and inflation would rise.
Indeed, central bank research suggested
that there was a probability––albeit small––
that inflation could exceed the target band
of ½‒3 percent. Moreover, normalizing
interest rates was also important for
preventing distortions in resource
allocation; for example, unduly low rates

13
could induce households to shift into
alternative assets, sparking a housing
bubble.
29.
On dealing with capital inflows,
the central bank had a pragmatic
approach. It would stick to its policy of

allowing the exchange rate to move in
response to fundamental market pressures,
intervening only to curb excessive
volatility, a strategy that was necessary
when the market was as thin as it is in
Thailand.

III. MEDIUM TERM: DYNAMIC THAILAND, REGAINED?
If navigating the short term could prove
challenging, the medium-term task––
restoring Thailand’s lost dynamism––is
hardly less daunting. A full return to the
1990s boom seems infeasible, and a return
to the earlier imbalances positively

undesirable. But some acceleration should
and can be achieved. The authorities’
strategy is to remove constraints on activity,
notably by building up the country’s
infrastructure and developing its financial
sector. How will it work?

A. Outlook and Overall Strategy
30.
The baseline medium-term
outlook for Thailand can be summarized
succinctly: more of the same. The
authorities’ strategy calls for fiscal
discipline, ensuring that the public sector
deficits are gradually reducing to low
levels; complemented with a careful
monetary policy that ensures that inflation
is kept in check. With macroeconomic
balances firmly under control, and a sound
economic framework in place, investment
should gradually recover, propelling
growth back to around 5 percent. As this
occurs, the current account surplus would
gradually dwindle, reaching zero by the end
of the projection period in 2015. In other
words, prudent economic management
should be sufficient to restore the pre-crisis
status quo, even in a less favorable
environment.

Real GDP Growth
(In percent)
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
-2.0
Baseline

Alternative

Average 1990-1996

-4.0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff estimates.

31.
What could go wrong? Many
things. The global economy could prove
worse than forecast. Or structural trends
could erode Thailand’s competitive
advantages, such as the development of
Indonesia’s motor vehicle industry or the
expansion of the electronics sector in
neighboring countries and China.

2015

14
Meanwhile, Thailand’s political uncertainty
and structural impediments mean that its
own domestic demand cannot be relied
upon, either. Should any of these risks
materialize, the growth outlook would
deteriorate. But the economy would still
likely remain stable—as the experience of
the global crisis has shown.
32.
At the same time, there is an
opportunity for Thailand to do better
than the baseline. And the government is
determined to try. It plans to alleviate some
of the constraints on economic activity, in
the hope that this will encourage
investment, reversing some of the sharp fall
that has occurred since the early 1990s.
33.
The government explained how
its strategy fit into the global discussion
about rebalancing. It pointed out that

comparative advantage dictated that
Thailand, as a small, open economy, would
inevitably depend on exports. Moreover,
while it would be desirable to develop
domestic demand as a second engine of
growth, this should not be done by
promoting one sector over another. Instead,
the aim should be to improve the
environment for economic activity, and try
to widen its geographic ambit, then allow
entrepreneurs to decide whether to produce
for the domestic or foreign market. That
said, the strategy might end up generating
greater domestic demand, since if better
infrastructure led to improved incomes this
would expand the domestic market, while
easier access to finance should help
smaller, employment-generating firms
grow. The staff broadly endorsed this
approach.

B. Expanding Infrastructure: Mind the Gap
Strategy
34.
A key element of the strategy is
to improve the country’s
competitiveness by stepping up
spending on infrastructure. The logic is
twofold. One is that infrastructure
spending has not kept up with the needs
of the economy. In the years leading up to
2008, general government investment
spending had been scaled back
substantially, to 3 percent of GDP. At this
level, it was about 1½ percentage point
below Thailand’s long-term average and
much lower than in neighboring
countries, such as Indonesia (6 percent)
or Vietnam (10 percent). The government
wants to reverse this trend.

General Government Net Acquisition of Nonfinancial Assets
(In percent of GDP)

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Indonesia

Thailand

Malaysia

Philippines

Vietnam

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

35.
The second rationale is deeper
and more complex. Since much of the
economic activity in the country is
clustered around Bangkok and the eastern
seaboard, workers from outlying regions
are forced to move in order to find

15
well-paying jobs. For social reasons, it
would be helpful if things also worked
the other way around, that is, if some jobs
moved to the workers. Spreading activity
around the country could also increase
the total amount of activity, creating a
larger and more vibrant domestic market.
Agglomeration effects, the economies of
scale that develop around existing
production bases, normally make such a
strategy difficult to realize.4 But there
may be some scope for doing this in
Thailand, especially since the outlying
areas are not truly remote: they are close
to neighboring countries or to the sea.

1 percentage point above the 2015 baseline,
reinforced by financial sector reforms
(described below) and accompanied by
political stability, the private sector
response could be significant. In such
circumstances, total investment could climb
to 31 percent of GDP, boosting growth by
an additional percentage point to 6 percent.
Gross Investment
(In percent of GDP)

47

42

Baseline

37

Alternative
32

36.
A key reason why these areas
have not developed is that their
infrastructure is poor, increasing
production costs to uncompetitive levels.
(A measure of this problem is provided by
logistics data, which show that transport
and related costs account for up to
20 percent of GDP, higher than in most
other countries, and double the ratio in the
United States). Accordingly, the
government is trying to improve their
infrastructure and connectivity, making
transport, in particular, a major focus of its
investment efforts. At the same time, the
government is trying to make growth more
inclusive in other ways, such as
accelerating spending on social services
and transfers to poorer regions of the
country.
Staff views
37.
The staff endorsed this approach,
noting that such an infrastructure-led
growth strategy could make a major
difference to Thailand’s medium-term
outlook. If general government investment
spending could be increased by

Average 1990-1996
27

22
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook and staff estimates.

38.
But there are significant obstacles
to these plans. To begin with, investment
will be constrained by implementation
capacity. Large infrastructure projects are
particularly complex, with difficulties at the
design, contracting, and implementation
phases. Finding a framework that can
address these problems has proved difficult,
as exemplified by the problems in
launching public-private partnerships
(PPP). For some time, Thailand had hoped
to tap the expertise and financing of the
private sector by arranging PPPs, but these
have proved difficult to realize, with only a
few minor projects being realized in recent
years. The country is accordingly preparing
a special new legal framework for PPPs,
but in addition greater political continuity
will be required.
––––––––––

4
See the World Bank’s 2009 World Development
Report.

16
39.
An infrastructure-led growth
strategy would also require budgetary
resources. The crisis measures (and the
fall in revenue) have eroded Thailand’s
fiscal space, pushing the public debt ratio
up over the past two years by
9 percentage points to 46 percent of GDP
in 2009/10.5 Preventing further erosion
would help preserve fiscal space to
counter any unexpected shocks, as well as
limit the risk of an adverse market
reaction that could occur should public
debt continue to drift upwards. So,
resources should be raised to pay for the
investment spending—especially if this
could be done in a manner that would
improve incentives, rather than
undermine them.
40.
How could this be done? There
would seem to be some scope to reallocate
expenditure. For example, the emergency
measures put in place to help households
cope with the crisis (including also some on
the tax side) could gradually be wound
back as the economic situation normalizes.
More broadly, it might be useful to conduct
an expenditure review to identify programs
that could be rationalized, as many other
countries have done.
41.
Even with such measures,
however, revenue will likely need to be
raised. There does, in fact, seem to be
scope to do this, as Thailand’s
––––––––––
5

The headline ratio is somewhat higher than in
neighboring countries, but this is largely definitional, as
Thailand’s figures conservatively include state-enterprise
and government-guaranteed debt. On a narrower basis,
the debt ratio remains below the 40 percent rule of thumb
threshold for emerging market countries, as proposed in
―
Strategies for Fiscal Consolidation in the Post-Crisis
World,‖ IMF, Fiscal Affairs Department policy paper,
2010.

revenue/GDP ratio is significantly lower
than that of other similar countries.
Personal income tax (PIT) collections at
just 2 percent of GDP are particularly low,
partly because only one-tenth of the
workforce pays tax; while the corporate
income tax base has also been eroded
through excessive exemptions and
deductions. For example, under the
personal income tax, double deductions are
allowed for some expenses, such as
transportation and electricity expenditure,
while stipulated farming deductions are so
high that they produce very low taxable
incomes. If such allowances could be
scaled back and administration improved, it
would be possible to lower rates, thereby
improving incentives, and still collect more
revenue because the base would have
widened. Also, the VAT rate could be
raised from the current level of 7 percent,
bringing it closer to the regional norm.
42.
To reinforce the credibility of
such a strategy, the medium-term fiscal
framework could be strengthened. For
example, the government could publish a
medium-term framework with targets for
deficits and debt, and an analysis of fiscal
risks. This could be supplemented with
the publication of a debt sustainability
analysis, including the fuller disclosure of
public-private partnership contingent
liabilities.
Authorities’ views
43.
The government stressed its
commitment to fiscal discipline. They
were planning to reduce the budget deficit
to minimal levels over the medium term;
and in any case, the scope for government
borrowing is strictly circumscribed, limited
by law to just 20 percent of budget

17
expenditures and up to 80 percent of
budgeted debt repayments.6 To reinforce
this law, a Public Finance Act will be
introduced that would lead to the
publication of an articulated medium-term
framework.
44.
At the same time, generating
additional budgetary resources to
finance greater investment would be
difficult. The government agreed that the

exceptional crisis measures should
eventually be withdrawn; indeed, it had
already rescinded a popular tax waiver for
house buyers. It is also planning to
introduce a new land tax, and is considering
a more fundamental reform of the tax
system, along the lines recommended by
the staff. But actual reform on all these
counts would need to wait until after next
year’s election.

C. Developing the Financial Sector
sector further to new entry. Initially, foreign
banks will be allowed to open two more
branches; and starting in 2012 foreign bank
branches will be allowed to upgrade to
subsidiaries. After assessing the effects of
these reforms, consideration will be given to
granting licenses to new Thai or foreign
financial service providers to fill any
remaining gaps in services.

Strategy
45.
The second key element of the
authorities’ medium term strategy is to
develop the financial markets. The logic of
this endeavor is essentially the same as with
building infrastructure: restoring dynamism
by alleviating constraints on activity; in this
case, constraints that keep capital scarce.
Indeed, the two reforms are complementary,
since financial market development will
make it easier to raise long-term funds for
infrastructure projects. In addition, several
other motivations are at play. Looking
forward, the development of the Thai
economy and its continuing integration
within the global economy will require an
increasingly sophisticated financial system.
Yet the current system is sheltered from
foreign competition, helping to keep banks
profitable, but less advanced or efficient.
46.
The authorities have developed
two new, complementary plans to address
these issues: the Financial Sector Master
Plan II (FSMP II) and the Capital
Markets Development Master Plan
(CMDMP). The five-year FSMP II aims to
inject competition into the sector, by
liberalizing branching regulations and
business scope—and by opening up the

47.
Another critical element is the
effort to promote financial access. For
example, banks are allowed to develop
venture capital funds, to help nurture SMEs.
And the central bank will encourage
microfinance, to reach the significant portion
of the population found to have no access to
bank lending.7
48.
Meanwhile, bold steps are
envisaged under the CMDMP. Under a
sweeping reform of the stock exchange,
6

––––––––––

This is why the fiscal stimulus, an extraordinary measure
to deal with exceptional circumstances, had to be done offbudget.
7

The FSMP also focuses on reducing operating costs (for
example, by eliminating outdated legislation) and
strengthening risk management practices.

18
fixed brokers’ commissions are being
eliminated, while the exchange will be
demutualized and linked to other regional
exchanges. Foreign exchange traded funds
(ETFs) will be allowed to have dual listings
on the Stock Exchange of Thailand. These
measures should act as a powerful
inducement to reduce costs and spur
innovation, thereby enlarging the size and
liquidity of the market.
Staff views
49.
The new financial sector master
plans should inject new life into
Thailand’s financial system, thereby
easing the financing constraints that
have helped hold back investment. In
particular, as competition in the sector
increases, and the profitability of lending to
larger companies diminishes, banks are
likely to lend to SMEs and micro
enterprises. Improved access should
particularly help domestically oriented
businesses, which––unlike foreign-invested
firms or large exporters––have to rely on
domestic sources for their funding.
50.
Amongst the capital market
reforms envisaged by the CMDMP, the
introduction of currency futures could
be particularly helpful in easing
constraints on smaller firms. Experience
in India has shown that this market can
develop rapidly. For while large firms can
use the existing forward markets, currency
futures would make it easier for SME
exporters and importers to protect against
exchange rate fluctuation, owing to their
smaller contract size and lower transactions
costs. And if SMEs increase their hedging,
this could relieve the burden on the BOT to
intervene in cases of currency volatility.

51.
Meanwhile, the FSMP II takes
valuable steps toward opening up the
banking system to new entry. Gradually,
the system should be opened more fully to
new entry, creating competition that could
raise standards, encourage new products to
be offered, and force existing banks to seek
growth by expanding access to underserved
customers.
52.
At the same time, caution will be
required in directing credit to
underserved sectors. The lending activity
of government-owned Specialized
Financial Institutions (SFIs) has expanded
rapidly over the past two years, as they
have sought to support SMEs and farmers
during a period when revenues were drying
up and commercial banks were turning
cautious in their lending. But loan risk
assessment has been inadequate, and these
loans may well end up aggravating the
nonperforming loan ratios, which had
already reached 16 percent by 2008. While
these SFIs, being state backed, remain
financially stable, they are distorting the
playing field among financial institutions,
and firms. Accordingly, a policy response
is needed and, as pointed out in the
2009 FSAP, it needs to go well beyond a
mere cleansing of their balance sheets. First
and foremost, the role of the SFIs needs to
be clarified, to ensure they truly focus on
gaps in the market and do not crowd out the
private sector. Then, measurable
performance targets should be set, and
outside audits conducted and published, so
that the public can monitor whether the
targets have been achieved. Finally, the
governance structure should be improved
by separating the ownership and
regulatory/supervisory functions, both

19
currently undertaken by the Ministry of
Finance.
Authorities’ views
53.
The authorities noted that many
of the steps envisaged in the CMDMP
will take time to realize. For example,
while all ASEAN countries are agreed in
principle on the benefits of integrating
capital markets, there are numerous
practical obstacles to implementation. For
example, tax treatments will need to be
harmonized, while a mechanism would
need to be established to resolve any legal
disputes. That said, an initial step is likely
to take place in the second half of 2011,
when Thai investors should be able to
access the Malaysian and Singapore
exchanges through their local brokers, as if
they were Thai stocks.

54.
Similar problems attend to the
introduction of currency futures. Under
the current system, customers are able to
use the forward markets only if they have
an underlying transaction. But this
requirement would not be practical with
exchange-traded currency futures, opening
up the risk of excessive speculative
activities.
55.
On the SFIs, the authorities
agreed a policy response was needed.
They were now conducting studies, in
conjunction with the World Bank, which is
doing an FSAP module on the SFIs, on the
basis of which a strategy would be
formulated.

IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
56.
Over the past year, the Thai
economy has come through a severe
stress test. Initially, the global crisis
devastated its exports, then just as exports
revived and the economy was beginning to
recover, the country was hit by a round of
political turmoil. But after each setback,
Thailand has proved resilient, thanks to its
sound economic framework and its forceful
policy response. At the same time,
however, the experience has underscored
the economy’s structural weakness: the loss
of its former dynamism, which has slowed
growth and left it largely dependent on
exports.
57.
The Thai authorities
consequently now face major challenges.
They need to nurse the recovery into a
sustained expansion. They need to find a
way to regain some of the economy’s lost
dynamism. And they need to do this amidst

a difficult environment, in which the global
economy may not be as buoyant going
forward as it was in the past, while political
uncertainties may dampen domestic
demand.
58.
With the economy normalizing,
the authorities’ immediate strategy is to
normalize the policy stance. After two
years of fiscal stimulus, the public sector
will begin to wind back its deficits next
year. Meanwhile, the Bank of Thailand in
July has started the process of normalizing
interest rates from their exceptionally low
levels. The staff strongly supports this
approach, because the economy is quickly
approaching its potential and because
sustaining the exceptionally low interest
rates may give rise to distorted asset
allocation decisions. Given the high degree

20
of uncertainty about the outlook, staff
agrees that interest rate normalization
should nonetheless proceed gradually, as
evidence accumulates that the recovery is
truly becoming entrenched.
59.
Monetary policy could be
complicated by volatile capital inflows,
arising from the multispeed nature of the
global recovery. To deal with this
problem, staff would recommend allowing
the exchange rate to serve as a buffer,
appreciating during periods of inflow and
depreciating during the outflows. There is
scope for such exchange rate flexibility, as
the growth in Thailand’s global export
market share and the IMF’s own
multilateral assessments indicate that the
baht is consistent with fundamentals.
Should sustained strong inflows materialize
and threaten to create asset bubbles, staff
would also support prudential measures,
such as reducing loan-to-value ratios on
property loans. Further liberalization of
capital outflows could also prove helpful.
60.
Over the medium term, the
authorities’ strategy for reviving the
economy’s dynamism centers on
alleviating some of the constraints on
activity, notably by building out the
country’s infrastructure and developing
its financial sector. Such measures should
expand opportunities for firms, allowing
them to better exploit the demand that does
materialize, whether foreign or domestic.
But it also holds out the particular hope of
generating greater domestic demand, since
a wider circle of activity could help
expand the domestic market, while easier
access to finance should help smaller,
employment-generating firms grow. The
staff, consequently, strongly endorses this
approach.

61.
Pursuing an infrastructure-led
growth strategy will not be easy,
however. As the authorities recognize, this
will require an improvement in
implementation capacity. It will also
require additional budgetary resources. So,
staff recommends conducting an
expenditure review to identify programs
that could be rationalized. In the meantime,
some saving could be achieved by winding
back subsidies introduced to help
households cope with the crisis. On the
revenue side, there is scope for widening
the income tax base, personal and
corporate, which has been eroded by
excessive exemptions and deductions. Also,
the VAT rate could be raised from the
current level of 7 percent to bring it back
into line with regional peers. The staff
welcomes plans to introduce a Public
Finance Act that would lead to publication
of a medium-term fiscal framework, and
proposes complementing this by publishing
a debt sustainability analysis.
62.
The staff strongly supports the
new master plans for the banking system
and capital markets. Together, they
should inject new life into Thailand’s
financial system, by promoting more
competition and linking Thailand’s markets
with those in the rest of ASEAN. The plans
would also introduce new services, such as
currency futures, which would make it
easier for exporters and importers to protect
against exchange rate fluctuations, thereby
relieving the burden on the Bank of
Thailand to intervene in cases of currency
volatility.
63.
These plans should be
complemented by two other initiatives.
Most urgent would be developing a
framework for reforming the specialized

21
financial institutions, where credit has been
expanding rapidly, leading to a
proliferation of nonperforming loans. A
new framework should not only aim to
improve risk assessment standards, but also
reconsider the role of the Ministry of
Finance, currently both owner and regulator
of the SFIs. Finally, the financial system
should gradually be opened more fully to
foreign entry, creating additional
competition that could force existing banks
to seek growth by expanding access to
underserved customers.

64.
This is a lengthy and ambitious
agenda. But given Thailand’s track
record—including the convincing manner
in which it has seen off the Great
Recession—staff is fully confident that it
will rise to the challenge this time, as well.
65.
It is recommended that the next
Article IV consultation with Thailand be
conducted on the standard 12-month cycle.

22
Box 1. Calibrating Monetary Policy in Thailand1
In response to the global recession and weak demand conditions at home, the Bank of Thailand
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) lowered the policy rate to a historically low level of
1¼ percent in April 2009. With signs of a strong domestic recovery, the MPC has twice raised the
policy rate, to 1¾ percent, with the likelihood that the rate would be raised further during the course
of 2010. Concurrently, faced with the deepest recession in history since the Great Depression, U.S.
monetary policy hit a lower limit on the Fed Funds rate in December 2008 and has stayed there since.
Going forward, the Federal Reserve has indicated that it intends to maintain this easy monetary stance
for an extended period.
Against this backdrop, how should the policy rate in Thailand be calibrated going forward?
Staff examined this issue using a New Keynesian (NK) Financial Policy Assessment System (FPAS)
model for Thailand. This macroeconomic model of the Thai economy blends the NK emphasis on
nominal and real rigidities with real business cycle dynamic stochastic general equilibrium modeling
with rational expectations. The model consists of four macroeconomic equations for Thailand (output
gap; Phillips curve; interest rate parity condition for exchange rate determination; and a Taylor rule
for the policy rate), each of which is specified in a sufficiently general form to allow inertia and
adaptive/rational expectations. To account for Thailand’s open economy, the model also consists of a
set of equations for the United States. The model was estimated using Bayesian techniques,
incorporates interest rate floors, and provides nonlinear confidence bands for the path of the policy
rate. In the analysis, the neutral (nominal) policy rate is assumed to be 4½ percent, with inflation at
2 percent.
With the strong rebound since 2009:Q4, the output gap in Thailand has closed substantially.
However, estimates of potential output (and hence the output gap) can vary in a wide margin. To take
account of this uncertainty, staff examined two possible scenarios: first, a scenario in which the output
gap closes in 2010:Q4; and second, a scenario in which the output gap closes earlier, in 2010:Q1. In
the first scenario, the policy rate increases start in 2010:Q2 and continue throughout 2011, resulting in
a cumulative increase of 375 basis points that brings the policy rate to 5 percent. In the second
scenario, in which the output gap closes earlier, the policy rate is about 25 basis points higher than in
the first scenario over much of the course from 2010:Q2 to 2011:Q4. But by 2011:Q4, the policy rate is
also at 5 percent. These alternative scenarios are shown in the figure below (first scenario—solid line;
second scenario—dashed line).
Thailand: Output Gaps and Policy Rates

Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staff estimates.

––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Kalra, S., 2010, Calibrating Monetary Policy under Uncertainty with Interest Rate Floors: An FPAS Model for
Thailand, IMF Working Paper, forthcoming.

23

Box 2. How Do Capital Flows to Thailand Compare With the Region?
Capital inflows to emerging Asia (EA) have been quite
volatile since the onset of the crisis.1 The standard
deviation of net capital flows in percent of GDP has more
than doubled since mid-2008, compared to the earlier part
of the decade. Thailand’s experience has been no different.

Rather, several other factors contributed to Thailand’s
divergence:

6

Net Capital Flows to Emerging Asia
and Volatility

4
2
0
-2
-4

In percent of GDP
Standard deviation 2000:Q1‒2008:Q2
Standard deviation 2008:Q3‒2010:Q1

-6
-8

2000Q1
2000Q3
2001Q1
2001Q3
2002Q1
2002Q3
2003Q1
2003Q3
2004Q1
2004Q3
2005Q1
2005Q3
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2009Q3
2010Q1

But the level, and even the direction, of flows to
Thailand has differed from the region, especially for
portfolio flows. When the rest of EA was experiencing
peak portfolio outflows in the last months of 2008,
Thailand had historically large net inflows. Similarly,
while portfolio flows to EA rebounded in mid-2009, net
flows to Thailand remained negative throughout the year.
Thailand’s growth performance was broadly in line with
its neighbors, so economic fundamentals are not the
explanation.

8

Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staf f calculations.

10
8

Foreign Portf olio Investment
(In percent of GDP)

6

Thailand

4

EA excluding Thailand

2
0
-2

–––––––––––––––––––––––––
1/

Emerging Asia includes NIEs, ASEAN, and India.

2010Q1

2009Q4

2009Q3

2009Q2

Relaxed regulations on capital outflows: The Thai authorities relaxed regulations for domestic
residents to invest in foreign securities in two steps, first in August 2009 and then in February 2010, to
encourage capital outflows so as to abate the upward pressure on the baht. While the new ceilings are
far from binding, Thai investors continue to accumulate foreign assets, suggesting that the measures
have been successful.

2009Q1

iii)

2008Q4

Thailand’s idiosyncratic risk: While the rest of EA received portfolio inflows in the second half of
2009, rising political tensions and delays in certain major investment projects began to weigh on
Thailand’s economic outlook, pushing up sovereign CDS spreads and keeping net flows outward. And
after recovering in the first quarter of this year, portfolio outflows resumed yet again in April-May
when tensions in Thailand’s political arena spilled over into the streets of Bangkok.

2008Q3

ii)

2008Q2

Local investors’ portfolio reallocation: The biggest
-4
-6
discrepancy came about in the last months of 2008
-8
when the repatriation of foreign assets by Thai
-10
investors, about $6 billion, was large enough to tip
the balance positive even though foreign investors
were pulling out of regional equity and debt markets.
Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staf f calculations.
Similarly when foreign investors returned to the
region in mid-2009, local investors reversed their portfolios in favor of foreign ones, turning net
portfolio investment negative. In other words, Thai investors behaved like those from mature markets,
bringing assets home at times of high risk aversion and sending them out as aversion abated. And
during much of the period, their movements dominated the portfolio account.
2008Q1

i)

24

Box 3. Assessment of Real Exchange Rate and International Reserves
Staff assesses the real exchange rate to be broadly in line with fundamentals. All three
methods used by the CGER indicate that the exchange rate is close to equilibrium. The Macro
Balance (MB) approach suggests an undervaluation of 2 percent; the External Sustainability
(ES) approach an overvaluation of 3 percent, and the equilibrium Real Exchange Rate (ERER)
approach an undervaluation of 8 percent. Essentially, this is because apart from the temporary
widening of the current account surplus during the global crisis, Thailand has not had large
external imbalances in recent years.
Thailand’s real effective exchange rate (REER) has moved in line with regional currencies
over the past decade. Following a sharp real depreciation during the Asian crisis, regional
currencies have appreciated since 2000 by 25 percent on average. After Lehman Brothers
collapsed, regional currencies initially depreciated, but then rebounded as Asia started to
recover. The baht REER has accordingly regained its mid-2008 pre-crisis peak.
180
160

14.0

Gross International Reserves
12.0

140

In billions USD
10.0

120

In months of next year imports
(right axis)

100

8.0

80

6.0

60

4.0

40
2.0

20
0

0.0

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

Thailand’s reserves were relatively stable
until recently, but have grown rapidly in the
past few years, as the current account
surplus has been accompanied by capital
inflows. Reserves remain broadly in line with
those of Asian peers, but at $138 billion as of
end-2009, they now exceed traditional ―r
ules of
thumb.‖ They are four times higher than
Greenspan-Guidotti Rule (100 percent of short
term debt coverage), and cover 43 percent of
broad money and 10 months of following
year’s imports.

Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; and IMF staff estimates.

Reserves are also above recently developed benchmarks that factor in an ―insurance
motive‖ for building reserves. Jeanne and others (2006) develop a model in which the optimal
level of reserves is determined by weighing the benefits of reserves––the reduced likelihood of
a sudden stop and smoothed consumption during a crisis––against the opportunity cost of higher
returns on less liquid assets.1 Using this model, the optimal level of reserves is a maximum of
around 25 percent of GDP, compared to Thailand’s end-2009 reserves of 45 percent of GDP.
–––––––––––––––––––

Jeanne and Ranciere, 2006, ―
The Optimal Level of International Reserves for Emerging Market
Countries: Formulas and Applications,‖ IMF Working Paper 06/229.
1/

25
Table 1. Thailand: Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–11
Main exports (percent of total 2009): machinery and appliances (14.1), vehicles and parts (7.9)
GDP per capita (2008): US$4,100
Unemployment rate (2009): 1.4 percent
Poverty rate (2002): 0.5 percent
Net FDI (2009): US$2.3 billion
Population (2008): 66.3 million

2007

2008

2009

Proj.
2010

Proj.
2011

Real GDP growth (percent)

4.9

2.5

-2.2

7.5

4.0

Inflation
Headline CPI (period average, percent)
Core CPI (period average, percent)

2.3
1.1

5.5
2.4

-0.9
0.3

3.0
1.0

2.8
1.5

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investment (excluding stocks)
Private
Public
Gross national saving
Private, including statistical discrepancy
Public
Foreign saving

26.4
19.5
6.8
32.7
26.1
6.6
-6.3

27.4
20.8
6.6
27.8
22.3
5.5
-0.4

24.4
17.9
6.5
32.1
30.0
2.1
-7.7

26.1
18.0
8.1
29.7
26.5
3.2
-3.6

26.4
18.7
7.7
29.0
25.2
3.8
-2.6

Fiscal accounts (percent of FY GDP) 1/
Central government net lending/borrowing (budgetary) 2/
Revenue
Total expenditure
General government net lending/borrowing 3/
Public sector balance 4/
Public sector debt

-1.4
17.9
19.3
0.2
-0.5
39.5

-0.6
18.1
18.7
0.1
-0.6
37.3

-4.2
17.0
21.2
-3.2
-3.6
45.2

-1.1
17.8
18.9
-2.7
-4.5
45.5

-2.3
17.9
20.2
-2.3
-3.6
45.4

6.3
9.7
4.8

9.2
4.1
8.8

6.8
12.8
2.5

...
...
...

...
...
...

15.7
6.3
151.3
18.2
138.5
9.1
1.4
17.1
87.5
6.0
305.9
34.5
6.5
6.6

1.2
0.4
175.2
15.9
175.6
26.8
23.5
24.7
111.0
10.1
363.8
33.3
-1.1
0.6

20.3
7.7
150.7
-14.0
131.4
-25.2
3.9
24.1
138.4
9.7
417.7
34.3
-2.1
-2.9

11.0
3.6
180.5
19.6
170.8
29.9
5.2
16.1
154.5
9.9
527.9
...
...
...

8.3
2.6
195.4
8.3
188.3
10.2
6.5
14.9
169.4
9.9
566.9
...
...
...

25.0
61.9
12.2
49.7
11.8

23.9
65.2
13.1
52.1
7.1

26.3
69.5
15.3
54.2
6.7

26.1
80.5
17.8
62.7
2.2

25.8
83.6
20.3
63.3
2.0

8,530
247.3

9,075
272.8

9,051
264.3

9,958
308.1

10,617
324.4

Monetary accounts (end-period, percent)
Broad money growth
Narrow money growth
Private sector credit growth
Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
(Percent of GDP)
Exports, f.o.b.
Growth rate (in dollar terms)
Imports, c.i.f.
Growth rate (in dollar terms)
Capital and financial account balance 5/
Overall balance
Gross official reserves (end-year)
(Months of following year's imports)
(Percent of maturing external debt)
Exchange rate (baht/U.S. dollar)
NEER appreciation (annual average) 6/
REER appreciation (annual average) 6/
External debt
(In percent of GDP)
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Public sector 7/
Private sector
Debt service ratio 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (In billions of baht)
(In billions U.S. dollars)
Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

1/ The fiscal year begins on October 1.
2/ There are sizable nonbudgetary expenditures outside of this balance (2.6 percent of GDP in 2010 and 0.7 percent in 2011, respectively).
3/ Includes budgetary central government, off-budget government spending (second stimulus package), extrabudgetary activities, and local
governments.
4/ IMF staff estimate. Includes general government and nonfinancial public enterprises.
5/ Includes errors and omissions.
6/ IMF staff calculations.
7/ Includes debt of state enterprises.
8/ In percent of exports of goods and services.

26
Table 2. Thailand: General Government Operations, 2006/07‒2010/11
(In percent of FY GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1/
2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

17.9
15.9
7.4
7.3
1.1
0.1
0.0
2.0

18.1
16.0
7.8
7.0
1.1
0.1
0.0
2.1

17.0
14.9
7.2
6.7
0.9
0.1
0.0
2.0

17.8
15.7
8.0
6.8
0.8
0.1
0.0
2.1

17.9
15.8
8.0
6.9
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1

2. Total expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Purchase/use of goods and services
Interest
Social benefits
Expense not elsewhere classified
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets

19.3
17.6
6.7
3.8
1.1
1.0
5.0
1.7

18.7
17.4
6.4
3.7
1.2
1.0
5.1
1.4

21.2
19.2
7.2
5.1
1.1
1.3
4.5
2.0

18.9
17.1
6.7
3.9
1.1
0.9
4.5
1.7

20.2
17.6
6.8
3.9
1.3
1.0
4.6
2.6

3. Net lending/borrowing (budgetary) [=1-2]
Net acquisition of financial assets
Net incurrence of liabilities

-1.4
-0.4
1.0

-0.6
0.6
1.2

-4.2
0.6
4.8

-1.1
2.5
3.6

-2.3
2.3
4.6

0.0
1.1
0.4
0.1

0.0
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.2
0.8
0.3
-3.4

2.6
0.9
0.0
-2.7

0.7
0.7
0.0
-2.3

4.0
3.9
0.1

3.7
3.9
-0.2

3.8
3.8
-0.1

3.6
3.6
0.0

4.0
4.0
0.0

C. General government [A+B]
Revenue
Total expenditure [=2+4-5-6+9]
Expense
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets
Net lending/borrowing (consolidated)

21.5
21.3
18.0
3.3
0.2

21.4
21.3
18.7
2.5
0.1

20.8
24.0
20.8
3.2
-3.2

20.9
23.7
19.6
4.1
-2.7

21.2
23.5
19.0
4.4
-2.3

D. Other
Central government net lending/borrowing (budgetary)
Central government net lending/borrowing (consolidated)
General government net lending/borrowing (consolidated)
Public enterprises balance
Public sector balance 3/

-1.4
0.1
0.2
-0.7
-0.5

-0.6
0.3
0.1
-0.7
-0.6

-4.2
-3.4
-3.2
-0.5
-3.6

-1.1
-2.7
-2.7
-1.8
-4.5

-2.3
-2.3
-2.3
-1.3
-3.6

8,311
24.7
30.8
39.5

9,130
23.7
30.0
37.3

8,847
29.2
35.6
45.2

9,820
29.1
35.0
45.5

10,353
28.4
34.2
45.4

A. Central government
1. Revenue
Taxes
Taxes on income, profits, and capital gains
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Taxes not elsewhere classified
Grants
Other revenue

4. Nonbudgetary/Loan expenditure 2/
5. Extrabudgetary balance
6. Social security balance
7. Net lending/borrowing (consolidated) [=3-4+5+6]
B. Local governments
8. Revenue
9. Total expenditure
10. Net lending/borrowing

Memorandum items:
FY GDP (in billions of baht)
General government debt
General government debt and SOE guaranteed debt
Public debt
Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

1/ The fiscal year begins on October 1.
2/ Expenditures related to Stimulus Package II undertaken outside the budget.
3/ IMF staff estimate. Includes general government and nonfinancial public enterprises.

2009/10
Proj.

2010/11
Proj.

27
Table 3. Thailand: Balance of Payments, 2007–15
(In billions of U.S. dollars, unless specified otherwise)
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

1. Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
(In percent of GDP)
Imports, c.i.f.
(In percent of GDP)
Of which: Oil and oil products
Services
Income and transfers

15.7
6.3
12.8
151.3
61.2
138.5
56.0
25.7
5.9
-3.0

1.2
0.4
-0.4
175.2
64.2
175.6
64.4
37.1
4.8
-3.3

20.3
7.7
19.4
150.7
57.0
131.4
49.7
24.8
5.5
-4.6

11.0
3.6
9.7
180.5
58.6
170.8
55.4
33.6
4.8
-3.5

8.3
2.6
7.2
195.4
60.2
188.3
58.0
36.2
4.8
-3.7

7.0
2.0
5.7
210.9
61.5
205.1
59.9
39.0
5.0
-3.8

2. Capital and financial account balance
Foreign direct investment, net
Portfolio investment, net
Other investment, net

-2.6
8.5
-6.7
-4.4

14.6
6.0
-2.1
10.7

-1.2
2.1
-9.2
5.9

2.1
5.8
1.5
-5.2

3.3
7.2
1.4
-5.3

3. Errors and omissions
(In percent of GDP)
4. Overall balance =1+2+3

4.0
1.6
17.1

8.9
3.3
24.7

5.0
1.9
24.1

3.1
1.0
16.1

5. Changes in official reserves (increase -)

-17.1

-24.7

-24.1

Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (US$ billion)
(In months of following year's imports)
(In percent of short-term debt) 1/
Export growth
Export volume growth 2/
Export unit value growth
Import growth
Import volume growth 2/
Import unit value growth
Change in terms of trade 2/
External debt/GDP
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Debt service ratio 3/
GDP (US$ billion)

87.5
6.0
305.9
18.2
9.4
8.0
9.1
-0.5
9.7
0.3
25.0
61.9
11.8
247.3

111.0
10.1
363.8
15.9
4.8
10.5
26.8
14.7
10.2
-5.5
23.9
65.2
7.1
272.8

138.4
9.7
417.7
-14.0
-5.7
-8.7
-25.2
-11.2
-15.4
8.1
26.3
69.5
6.7
264.3

Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ With remaining maturity of one year or less.
2/ IMF staff calculations and estimates.
3/ In percent of exports of goods and services.

2012
2013
Projection

2014

2015

4.8
1.3
3.6
228.7
62.6
225.0
61.6
41.4
5.1
-4.0

2.8
0.7
1.6
248.4
63.6
246.7
63.1
43.9
5.1
-3.9

0.0
0.0
-1.0
269.6
64.4
270.6
64.6
46.9
5.2
-4.2

3.7
8.0
1.3
-5.6

4.3
8.9
1.1
-5.7

4.5
9.4
1.0
-6.0

4.8
10.0
0.9
-6.1

3.2
1.0
14.9

3.4
1.0
14.1

3.7
1.0
12.8

3.9
1.0
11.2

4.2
1.0
9.0

-16.1

-14.9

-14.1

-12.8

-11.2

-9.0

154.5
9.9
528
19.6
14.4
4.6
29.9
15.6
12.4
-5.1
26.1
80.5
2.2
308.1

169.4
9.9
567
8.3
8.0
0.3
10.2
8.5
1.6
-2.8
25.8
83.6
2.0
324.4

183.5
9.8
592
7.9
7.6
0.2
9.0
8.5
0.4
-0.3
25.8
88.6
1.9
342.7

196.3
9.5
615
8.4
7.5
0.9
9.7
9.2
0.4
-0.3
25.1
91.6
2.4
365.3

207.5
9.1
629
8.6
7.6
1.0
9.7
9.2
0.4
1.0
24.2
94.5
2.2
390.9

216.5
8.7
652
8.5
7.8
0.7
9.7
9.9
-0.2
1.3
23.3
97.5
2.3
418.9

28
Table 4. Thailand: Monetary Survey, 2007–10
(In billions of baht, unless otherwise specified)

Bank of Thailand
Net foreign assets
Net dometic assets
Of which : other items (net)
Reserve money - Monetary base (M0)
Currency in Circulation
Deposits at Bank of Thailand
Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to central government
Credit to nonfinancial public enterprises
Credit to financial corporations
Total credit to private sector
Credit to other nonfinancial corporations
Credit to other resident sector
Other items (net)
Broad money
Narrow money
Currency
Transferable Deposits
Quasi money
Memorandum items
Broad money growth (y/y percent change)
Narrow money growth (y/y percent change)
Credit to private sector growth (y/y percent change)
Contribution to broad money growth
NFA
NDA
Domestic credit

Sources: Bank of Thailand; and IMF staff calculations.

2007
Dec

2008
Dec

2009
Dec

2010
Jan

2,951
-2,017
-1,389

3,872
-2,833
-1,558

4,525
-3,422
-1,580

4,653
-3,603
-1,569

4,606
-3,517
-1,405

934
877
57

1,040
961
78

1,103
1,045
58

1,050
992
58

1,089
1,027
62

3,594
5,515
8,884
132
348
574
7,826
3,775
4,051
-3,369

4,132
5,811
9,566
203
325
519
8,513
4,135
4,378
-3,755

4,570
6,047
10,014
292
366
625
8,726
3,847
4,879
-3,967

4,673
5,929
9,961
296
366
654
8,639
3,754
4,885
-4,032

4,673
6,329
10,318
321
377
662
8,953
3,851
5,102
-3,990

9,109
1,000
720
280
8,110

9,944
1,041
752
289
8,903

10,617
1,175
844
331
9,442

10,602
1,148
831
317
9,454

11,001
1,262
833
429
9,740

6.3
9.7
4.8

9.2
4.1
8.8

6.8
12.8
2.5

5.5
10.8
1.9

6.8
14.4
5.9

6.3
7.5
-1.3
3.9

9.2
5.9
3.3
7.5

6.8
4.4
2.4
4.5

5.5
5.4
0.2
4.4

6.8
1.7
5.1
7.8

May

29
Table 5. Thailand: Financial Sector Indicators, 2005–10 1/

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Latest
2010 observation

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets

13.2

13.6

14.8

13.9

15.8

15.7

Q1

9.9

10.7

11.9

10.7

11.7

11.7

Q1

Asset quality
Nonperforming loans to total loans

9.1

8.1

7.9

5.7

5.3

5.0

Q1

83.7

82.7

86.5

97.9

99.4

102.1

Q1

Return on average assets (before tax and provisioning)

1.9

1.9

1.7

2.0

1.9

1.9

Q1

Return on average assets (after tax)

1.4

0.8

0.1

1.0

1.0

1.1

Q1

Return on equity (after tax)

14.2

8.5

1.2

10.3

9.5

10.8

Q1

Noninterest income/total income

21.0

17.9

16.5

18.5

24.2

26.2

Q1

Operating expenses/net interest income and dividend

72.4

78.4

80.9

74.5

81.8

82.0

Q1

Ratio of loans to deposits plus bills of exchange 2/

88.1

86.4

88.0

88.5

87.6

88.3

Q1

Liquidity to deposits and borrowings ratio

18.2

16.7

19.6

24.2

27.4

26.6

Q1

FX deposits (in percent of total deposits)

2.5

2.6

2.6

2.8

2.8

2.6

Q1

FX loans to residents (in percent of total loans)

3.2

2.5

2.3

2.6

2.5

2.5

Q1

Net open forex position (in percent of total capital)

2.5

1.6

3.1

1.9

4.1

2.3

Q1

Government debt held by FS (percent of total FS assets)

4.2

...

...

...

...

...

Q1

Loan loss reserves to nonperforming loans
Earnings and profitability

Liquidity

Sensitivity to market risk

Memorandum items:
Credit to private sector (percent change) 3/
Nominal GDP (in US$ billion)

8.0

4.5

4.8

8.8

2.5

4.5

Q1

176.3

207.5

247.3

272.8

264.3

308.1

Staff proj.

Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Data for locally incorporated banks and excludes retail banks, foreign branches and subsidiaries.
2/ Excludes interbank loans and deposits. Bills of exchange are CD-like instruments that are considered a stable source of
bank funding.
3/ Includes all depository corporations.

30
Table 6. Thailand: Medium-Term Framework, 2007–15
Projections
2012 2013

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

4.9
2.8
1.5

2.5
3.0
1.2

-2.2
-0.1
-9.0

7.5
5.2
9.7

4.0
4.0
4.1

4.3
4.0
4.4

52.0
16.6

52.1
16.7

52.7
14.9

52.5
14.0

52.5
13.9

Headline CPI inflation (period average, percent)
Core CPI inflation (period average, percent)

2.3
1.1

5.5
2.4

-0.9
0.3

3.0
1.0

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investment (excl stocks)
Private
Public
Gross national saving
Private, including statistical discrepancy
Public
Foreign saving (- = current account surplus)

26.4
19.5
6.8
32.7
26.1
6.6
-6.3

27.4
20.8
6.6
27.8
22.3
5.5
-0.4

24.4
17.9
6.5
32.1
30.0
2.1
-7.7

Fiscal accounts (percent of FY GDP) 1/
Central government net lending/borrowing (budgetary)
Revenue
Total expenditure
General government net lending/borrowing (consolidated)
Revenue
Total expenditure
Public sector balance 2/
Total public sector debt (end-period)

-1.4
17.9
19.3
0.2
21.5
21.3
-0.5
39.5

-0.6
18.1
18.7
0.1
21.4
21.3
-0.6
37.3

-4.2
17.0
21.2
-3.2
20.8
24.0
-3.6
45.2

Real GDP growth (percent)
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Real private consumption (in percent of GDP)
Real private investment (in percent of GDP)

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars)
Exports, f.o.b.
(Volume growth) 3/
Imports, c.i.f.
(Volume growth) 3/
Trade balance
Current account balance
(Percent of GDP)
Financial account balance 4/
Overall balance

2014

2015

4.5
4.3
4.6

4.8
5.1
4.9

5.0
5.3
5.0

52.4
13.7

52.4
13.4

52.7
13.2

53.1
13.0

2.8
1.5
0.7

2.5
1.7
0.9

2.0
1.8
0.7

2.0
1.8
0.8

2.0
1.8
0.6

26.1
18.0
8.1
29.7
26.5
3.2
-3.6

26.4
18.7
7.7
29.0
25.2
3.8
-2.6

26.8
19.6
7.2
28.9
24.9
3.9
-2.0

27.5
20.3
7.2
28.8
24.8
4.0
-1.3

28.1
21.1
7.0
28.8
24.8
4.1
-0.7

28.6
21.7
6.9
28.6
24.7
3.9
0.0

-1.1
17.8
18.9
-2.7
20.9
23.7
-4.5
45.5

-2.3
17.9
20.2
-2.3
21.2
23.5
-3.6
45.4

-2.3
17.9
20.2
-1.6
21.6
23.1
-2.8
45.3

-2.2
17.9
20.1
-1.4
21.7
23.1
-2.6
45.3

-2.1
18.0
20.0
-1.3
21.8
23.1
-2.5
45.1

-1.9
18.0
19.9
-1.1
21.9
23.0
-2.3
44.7

151.3 175.2 150.7
9.4
4.8
-5.7
138.5 175.6 131.4
-0.5
14.7 -11.2
12.8
-0.4
19.4
15.7
1.2
20.3
6.3
0.4
7.7
1.4
23.5
3.9
17.1
24.7
24.1

180.5 195.4 210.9 228.7 248.4 269.6
14.4
8.0
7.6
7.5
7.6
7.8
170.8 188.3 205.1 225.0 246.7 270.6
15.6
8.5
8.5
9.2
9.2
9.9
9.7
7.2
5.7
3.6
1.6
-1.0
11.0
8.3
7.0
4.8
2.8
0.0
3.6
2.6
2.0
1.3
0.7
0.0
5.2
6.5
7.1
8.0
8.4
8.9
16.1
14.9
14.1
12.8
11.2
9.0

Gross official reserves (end-year)
(Months of following year's imports of goods)
(Percent of short-term debt by remaining maturity)

87.5 111.0 138.4
6.0
10.1
9.7
306
364
418

154.5 169.4 183.5 196.3 207.5 216.5
9.9
9.9
9.8
9.5
9.1
8.7
528
567
592
615
629
652

External debt (percent of GDP)
Debt-service ratio 5/

25.0
11.8

23.9
7.1

26.3
6.7

Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/

The fiscal year begins on October 1.
Fund staff estimate. Includes general government and nonfinancial public enterprises.
Fund staff estimate.
Includes errors and omissions.
In percent of exports of goods and services.

26.1
2.2

25.8
2.0

25.8
1.9

25.1
2.4

24.2
2.2

23.3
2.3

31
Table 7. Thailand: Medium-Term Fiscal Scenario, 2008/09‒20014/15 1/
(In percent of FY GDP, unless otherwise stated)
2008/09

A. Central government
1. Revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income, profits, and capital gains
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Taxes not elsewhere classified
Social contributions
Grants
Other revenue

2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.

17.0
14.9
7.2
6.7
0.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.0

17.8
15.7
8.0
6.8
0.8
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

17.9
15.8
8.0
6.9
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

17.9
15.8
8.0
6.9
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

17.9
15.8
8.0
7.0
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

17.9
15.8
8.0
7.1
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

18.0
15.9
8.0
7.1
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.1

2. Total expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Purchase/use of goods and services
Interest
Social benefits
Expense not elsewhere classified
Of which: capital grant to other general government
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets

21.2
19.2
7.2
5.1
1.1
1.3
4.5
0.0
2.0

18.9
17.1
6.7
3.9
1.1
0.9
4.5
0.8
1.7

20.2
17.6
6.8
3.9
1.3
1.0
4.6
1.1
2.6

20.2
17.7
6.8
3.9
1.3
1.1
4.6
1.0
2.5

20.1
17.6
6.8
3.9
1.1
1.1
4.6
0.6
2.5

20.0
17.7
6.8
3.9
1.1
1.2
4.6
0.5
2.3

19.9
17.7
6.8
3.9
1.1
1.3
4.6
0.5
2.2

3. Net lending/borrowing (budgetary) [=1-2]

-4.2

-1.1

-2.3

-2.3

-2.2

-2.1

-1.9

4. Nonbudgetary/Loan expenditure 2/
5. Extrabudgetary balance
6. Social security balance
7. Net lending/borrowing (consolidated) [=3-4+5+6]

0.2
0.8
0.3
-3.4

2.6
0.9
0.0
-2.7

0.7
0.7
0.0
-2.3

0.0
0.7
0.0
-1.6

0.0
0.8
0.0
-1.4

0.0
0.8
0.0
-1.3

0.0
0.8
0.0
-1.1

B. Local government
8. Revenue
9. Total expenditure
10. Net lending/borrowing

3.8
3.8
-0.1

3.6
3.6
0.0

4.0
4.0
0.0

3.8
3.8
0.0

4.1
4.1
0.0

4.1
4.1
0.0

4.2
4.2
0.0

C. General government [=A+B]
Revenue
Total expenditure [=2+4-5-6+9]
Expense
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets
Net lending/borrowing (consolidated)

20.8
24.0
20.8
3.2
-3.2

20.9
23.7
19.6
4.1
-2.7

21.2
23.5
19.0
4.4
-2.3

21.6
23.1
19.3
3.8
-1.6

21.7
23.1
19.3
3.8
-1.4

21.8
23.1
19.4
3.7
-1.3

21.9
23.0
19.5
3.5
-1.1

Memorundum items:
Central government net lending/borrowing (budgetary)
Central government net lending/borrowing (consolidated)
General government net lending/borrowing (consolidated)
Public enterprises balance
Public sector balance 3/

-4.2
-3.4
-3.2
-0.5
-3.6

-1.1
-2.7
-2.7
-1.8
-4.5

-2.3
-2.3
-2.3
-1.3
-3.6

-2.3
-1.6
-1.6
-1.2
-2.8

-2.2
-1.4
-1.4
-1.2
-2.6

-2.1
-1.3
-1.3
-1.2
-2.5

-1.9
-1.1
-1.1
-1.2
-2.3

Public sector debt
Central government
FIDF
NFPE
SFIs guranteed debt, VF and EFPO

45.2
29.2
1.1
12.5
2.4

45.5
29.1
1.0
13.1
2.4

45.4
28.4
0.9
13.7
2.4

45.3
28.0
0.9
14.0
2.4

45.3
27.8
0.8
14.3
2.4

45.1
27.3
0.8
14.6
2.4

44.7
26.7
0.7
14.8
2.4

Public sector consumption
Public sector investment 4/
General government
Public enterprises

15.0
5.5
3.3
2.1

13.1
7.5
4.1
3.4

13.6
7.4
4.4
2.9

13.8
6.7
3.8
2.9

13.9
6.6
3.8
2.8

13.9
6.5
3.7
2.8

14.0
6.4
3.5
2.8

Sources: IMF staff estimates.
1/ The fiscal year runs from October 1 to September 30.
2/ Expenditures related to Stimulus Package II undertaken outside the budget.
3/ Fund staff estimate. Includes general government and nonfinancial public enterprises.
4/ Fiscal basis; differs from national account.

32
APPENDIX I. THAILAND––PUBLIC AND EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
A. Public Debt Sustainability
Thailand’s public debt is moderate, and
forecast to remain so. At the end of fiscal
year 2008/09, public debt amounted to
45 percent of GDP.1 The global crisis had
some impact on this ratio, pushing it up by
8 percentage points in 2008/09, as GDP
contracted, government revenue fell, and the
government responded to the downturn by
stepping up spending. But this development
is likely to prove short-lived. The economy
has already begun to recover, and as the
expansion becomes entrenched, it should
allow the public sector deficits to be wound
back. More specifically, the baseline
scenario envisages that the fiscal stimulus
package would be phased out by 2011, while
the government revenue/GDP ratio
gradually recovers to pre-crisis levels and
nonstimulus expenditure remains stable as a
percent of GDP. Under these assumptions,
the public debt path would be sustainable,
with the ratio stabilizing around 45 percent
through the medium term. Within the stable
overall ratio, direct government debt would
decline relative to GDP, but the nonfinancial
public enterprise debt ratio would increase
throughout the period, as state firms step up
their investments.
This profile is resilient to most shocks.
With the debt burden modest and very little
1

This ratio is somewhat higher than the average
―
headline‖ ratio in Emerging Asia, but largely because it
is based on a much broader concept. In Thailand, public
debt includes not only government debt, but also
nonfinancial public enterprise debt, as well as Financial
Institution Development Fund debt (the cost of financial
sector restructuring inflicted by the 1997 financial crisis)
and Specialized Financial Institutions guaranteed debt.

debt owed externally, shocks to interest and
exchange rates make only small differences
to the medium-term forecast. A more
sizeable impact would come from shocks to
the primary balance, or a combination
shock. If the primary balance records an
average deficit of 1½ percent of GDP over
the forecast horizon, instead of averaging
zero as assumed, then by 2015 the debt/GDP
ratio would be 6 percentage points higher
than in the baseline. A combined shock, in
which the real interest rate, growth rate, and
primary balance are permanently worse than
under the baseline by one quarter standard
deviation, would increase the debt/GDP
ratio by 6 percentage points.
A contingent liabilities shock would
generate a large deviation from baseline.
That is, if 10 percent of GDP in contingent
liabilities are brought on budget in 2011,
then even by 2015 the debt to GDP ratio
would still remain 9 percentage points
higher than in the baseline.
The most significant risk to the debt
outlook comes from a potential slowdown
in growth. Under the baseline scenario,
growth is forecast to average around
4½ percent over the medium term, roughly
in line with the historical average. But the
standard deviation of growth in Thailand is
reasonably high. So, if growth proved lower
than assumed by one-half a standard
deviation, then the growth rate would
average just 2.8 percent, and this in turn
would push up the debt/GDP ratio by
9 percentage points.

33
In all scenarios, however, Thailand’s
public debt path would remain
sustainable.
B. External Debt Sustainability
Thailand’s external debt ratio is low, and
is projected to decline gradually over the
medium term. Gross external debt
amounted to just 26 percent of GDP in
March 2010 ($74 billion). It has risen
modestly over the previous few quarters,
owing mostly to the accumulation of
short-term private debt, as the revival of
trade has sparked a rebound in trade credits
and hedging activities against foreign
currency receivables. This process will
continue over the medium term, with
external liabilities expanding along with
trade. However, the pace of debt
accumulation will be slower than economic
growth, thereby reducing the external debt
ratio by about 3 percentage points over the
medium term to 23 percent of GDP. Public
sector external debt, currently 2½ percent of
GDP, should remain at this minimal level.
Stress tests show that the external debt
outlook is resilient to macroeconomic
shocks. Shocks to the economic growth rate
and the external interest rate make only
small differences to the medium-term
forecast. A permanent one-half standard
deviation shock to the noninterest current

account balance has a much larger impact,
as it would effectively eliminate the forecast
current account surplus. As a result, by
2015 the external debt ratio would be about
12 percentage points higher than in the
baseline, bringing the ratio to around
35 percent of GDP. A combined shock
would produce similar results, assuming the
external interest rate, and the noninterest
current account balance deviate from the
baseline by a one-quarter standard deviation.
The biggest potential impact could come
from large exchange rate depreciation. A
real depreciation of 30 percent could raise
the debt ratio by about 20 percentage points.
However, this result largely reflects the
assumption that trade flows would not
respond to the depreciation, whereas such a
large real depreciation would normally bring
about a sharp improvement in the current
account that would––after the initial rise––
bring the debt ratio back down significantly
over the medium term.
Overall, in all stress scenarios Thailand’s
debt path remains sustainable and below
the levels seen in the early 2000s.

Table A1. Thailand: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15
(In percent of FY GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012
2013

2014

2015
Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/

47.3

43.5

39.5

37.3

45.2

45.5

45.4

45.3

45.3

45.1

44.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which : contribution from real interest rate
Of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2–3) 5/

-2.1
-5.1
-4.1
24.1
20.0
-1.0
-0.9
1.3
-2.2
-0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
2.9

-3.9
-4.2
-4.4
24.3
20.0
-1.6
-2.1
0.1
-2.2
0.5
1.8
0.0
1.8
0.0
0.3

-3.9
-2.3
-2.0
23.5
21.6
-1.7
-0.8
1.1
-1.9
-0.9
1.3
0.0
1.3
0.0
-1.6

-2.2
-2.1
-1.9
23.1
21.2
-1.4
-1.0
0.8
-1.8
-0.4
1.2
0.0
1.2
0.0
-0.1

7.9
5.0
0.9
22.5
23.4
4.1
3.9
2.1
1.8
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.9

0.3
0.0
1.7
22.6
24.3
-1.6
-1.6
1.7
-3.4
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-0.1
1.2
0.6
22.9
23.4
0.7
0.7
2.1
-1.4
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.3

-0.2
-0.3
0.2
23.2
23.4
-0.6
-0.6
1.5
-2.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
-0.1
0.2
23.3
23.5
-0.3
-0.3
1.6
-1.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-0.2
-0.4
0.0
23.4
23.4
-0.4
-0.4
1.6
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-0.4
-0.7
-0.2
23.6
23.4
-0.5
-0.5
1.6
-2.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

196.3

178.6

167.9

161.8

201.3

201.5

198.9

195.0

194.1

192.2

189.5

8.5
14.7

5.8
11.8

8.8
21.2

8.4
23.0

10.7
27.6

10.6
32.2

9.6
30.5

8.7
29.3

8.1
29.0

7.5
28.7

6.9
28.4

45.5
45.5

41.8
46.7

39.6
47.9

37.4
49.4

35.2
50.8

33.1
52.3

8.2
7.0
4.4
...
2.6
12.3
1.7

3.2
7.0
4.8
...
2.2
-0.5
0.6

4.9
6.1
3.6
...
2.4
5.0
0.2

4.4
5.8
3.8
...
2.0
4.5
0.2

4.7
5.9
3.9
...
2.0
4.5
0.0

4.9
5.9
3.9
...
2.0
4.7
-0.2

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
In billions of U.S. dollars
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010-15
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

4.9
7.5
3.1
1.4
4.3
9.7
-4.1

5.2
6.4
0.6
-4.8
5.8
4.9
-4.4

4.7
6.0
3.0
13.8
3.0
13.1
-2.0

5.0
7.0
2.3
6.9
4.7
2.9
-1.9

-4.7
7.1
5.4
-3.4
1.7
5.3
0.9

1/ Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used. Fiscal year begins on October 1.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

-0.5

34

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/

0.0
-0.5

35
Figure A1. Thailand: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and historical scenarios
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
2005

Interest rate shock (in percent)

15
14
Gross financing need under
13
baseline (right scale)
12
11
10
Baseline
9
45
8
7
6
5
Historical
33 4
3
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015

65
60
55

i-rate
shock

50

47
45

45

Baseline

40

Baseline:
Scenario:
Historical:

35
30
2005

2007

2009

2011

4.0
4.9
4.1

2013

2015

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and no
policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock (in percent per year)
65

65

60

60

Growth
shock

55

54

50

55

No policy change

52
51

50
PB shock

45

45

45

45

Baseline
40

40

Baseline: 4.4
Scenario: 2.8
Historical: 4.1

35
30
2005

Baseline

2007

2009

2011

2013

Baseline: -0.1
Scenario: -1.5
Historica; : 2.4

35

2015

30
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities
shocks /3

Combined shock 2/
65

65
60

Contingent liabilities
shock

60

Combined shock

54

55

55
51

50

30 percent
depreciation

50

46
45

45
Baseline
40

40

35

35

30
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

45

45

2015

30
2005

Baseline

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Sources: International Monetary Fund country desk data and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent one -quarter standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2011, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Table A2. Thailand: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012 2013

2014

2015

29.6

29.4

25.0

23.9

26.3

26.1

25.8

25.8

25.1

24.2

23.3

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net nondebt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, including change in gross foreign assets (2–3) 3/

-2.3
-2.2
3.5
2.0
73.4
75.4
-3.8
-1.9
0.9
-1.3
-1.4
-0.1

-0.1
-9.2
-2.1
-2.7
73.7
71.0
-3.7
-3.4
1.0
-1.3
-3.1
9.1

-4.4
-14.4
-7.1
-7.6
73.5
65.9
-3.3
-4.0
0.8
-1.2
-3.5
10.0

-1.1
-1.2
-1.2
-1.8
76.6
74.8
1.7
-1.7
0.6
-0.6
-1.8
0.2

2.4
-7.6
-7.8
-9.4
68.6
59.2
-0.7
0.9
0.1
0.6
0.2
10.0

-0.2
-5.3
-3.9
-4.7
68.9
64.2
0.0
-1.3
0.4
-1.7
...
5.1

-0.4
-3.9
-2.9
-3.7
70.8
67.1
-0.4
-0.7
0.3
-1.0
...
3.6

0.1
-3.6
-2.4
-3.1
72.1
68.9
-0.5
-0.6
0.4
-1.0
...
3.7

-0.8
-3.1
-2.1
-2.4
73.1
70.7
-0.7
-0.3
0.7
-1.1
...
2.3

-0.9
-2.6
-1.4
-1.7
74.0
72.3
-0.7
-0.4
0.7
-1.1
...
1.7

-0.9
-1.9
-0.8
-1.0
74.9
73.9
-0.8
-0.3
0.8
-1.1
...
1.0

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

40.3

39.9

34.1

31.3

38.4

37.9

36.4

35.8

34.3

32.7

31.1

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
In percent of GDP

44.6
25.3

46.0
22.2

42.0
17.0

54.8
20.1

31.1
11.8

47.4
15.4

46.6
14.4

49.3
14.4

53.5
14.6

57.4
14.7

62.3
14.9

26.3

22.6

19.1

14.5

9.5

0.0

7.5
8.6
1.6
17.2
26.6
3.9
0.0

4.0
1.3
1.3
8.1
10.0
2.9
0.4

4.3
1.3
1.6
7.6
8.6
2.4
0.5

4.5
2.0
3.1
8.1
9.4
2.1
0.7

4.8
2.1
3.0
8.3
9.4
1.4
0.7

5.0
2.1
3.7
8.4
9.5
0.8
0.8

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/

36

Baseline: External debt

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest
current account 6/
-1.5

-2.1

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

4.6
4.5
2.9
13.6
24.0
-3.5
3.8

5.1
11.8
3.9
17.9
10.6
2.1
3.7

4.9
13.6
3.1
18.9
10.7
7.1
3.3

2.5
7.6
2.6
14.9
25.0
1.2
-1.7

-2.2
-0.9
0.4
-13.2
-23.3
7.8
0.7

1/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0) and
rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and nondebt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.

37
Figure A2. Thailand: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
55

26
Gross financing
need under baseline
(right scale)
Baseline
Historical

50
45
40
35
30

55
50

24
22
20

40

35

i-rate
shock

30

23

25
20

18

25

16

20

14

12

10
5
0
2004

Baseline

23

2006

2008

2010

2012

10

12

5

10

0
2004

2014

Growth shock (in percent per year)
55

55

50
45

40

Baseline: 5.0
Scenario: 3.7
Historical: 4.1

50

Growth
shock

35

35
30

2006

2008

2012

2014

Baseline: 2.3
Scenario: 0.2
Historical: 4.6

40

26

2010

Noninterest current account shock (in percent
of GDP)

45

CA shock
35

30
25

25
Baseline

20

23

15

10

10

5

5

2006

2008

2010

2012

0
2004

2014

Combined shock 2/
55

50

50

35

2008

2010

2012

2014

45

Combined
shock

40

2006

23

Real depreciation shock 3/

55
45

Baseline

20

15

43

40
31

30

30%
depreciation

35

30

25
Baseline

20

23

25

Baseline

20

15

23

15

10

10

5
0
2004

24

15

15

0
2004

Baseline: 2.4
Scenario: 2.9
Historical: 3.1

45

5
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in
the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Tenyear historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2010. Assumes no impact on the current account.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
THAILAND
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation––Informational Annex
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
September 3, 2010
Contents

Page

I.

Fund Relations .......................................................................................................2

II.

Bank-Fund Collaboration.......................................................................................4

III. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ........................................................5
IV. Statistical Issues .....................................................................................................7

2
ANNEX I. THAILAND: FUND RELATIONS
(As of August 27, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 05/03/1949; Article VIII.

II.
Article VIII Status: Thailand has accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making
of payments and transfers for current international transactions.
III.

General Resources Account:

SDR Million
1,081.90

100.00

Fund holdings of currency

851.83

78.73

Reserve position in Fund

230.07

21.27

SDR Million

% Allocation

Net cumulative allocation

970.27

100.00

Holdings

971.71

100.15

Quota

IV.

% Quota

SDR Department:

V.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

VI.

Financial Arrangements:

Type

1. Stand-By
2. Stand-By

Approval
Date

8/20/97
6/14/85

Expiration
Date

6/19/2000
12/31/86

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)

2,900.00
400.00

2,500.00
260.00

VII. Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million, based on existing use of
resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2010
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2011

2012

2013

2014

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.01

VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: After more than a decade when the baht was
effectively pegged closely to the U.S. dollar through a basket of currencies, the

3
exchange rate regime was changed on July 2, 1997. The exchange rate system is now a
floating exchange rate regime with occasional central bank intervention.
IX. Last Article IV Consultation: At the conclusion of the 2009 Article IV
consultations last May, Executive Directors noted that Thailand’s strong economic
fundamentals would support the economy through the downturn. At the same time, they
underlined the need to decisively implement policies to support domestic demand, and
normalize the political situation to restore investor confidence. Directors found the
increases in public deficits and debt appropriate from a countercyclical perspective,
given that they would decline over the medium term. Directors welcomed the easing
monetary policy stance, and recognized that the banking sector remained resilient
through the global financial turmoil, owing to their strong initial positions and
strengthened supervision by the Bank of Thailand.
X.

Recent Technical Assistance:

FAD: A tax policy mission in July 2003 and a fiscal risks mission took place in
July 2008. A preparatory mission for a fiscal ROSC took place in February 2005. A full
fiscal ROSC mission took place in November 2008 and left a draft report with the
authorities for comments. A mission to provide assistance on integrating state owned
enterprises in fiscal accounts took place in November 2009.
LEG: In February 2004, LEG provided technical assistance (TA) in the areas of
corporate insolvency and AML/CFT. In April 2006, a LEG mission visited Thailand to
provide TA relating to the country’s AML/CFT regime. An AML/CFT ROSC was
completed during 2007. Further missions took place during 2009–10 to produce a
national AML/CFT strategy for Thailand, as part of a three to five strategic partnership
to improve Thailand’s AML/CFT regime.
MCM: A TA mission on the operational framework for monetary policy took place in
September 2003 and a mission on AML/CFT in February 2004. In 2008 a mission
investigated the possibility of setting up a sovereign wealth fund. Training missions on
monitoring macrofinancial risks using a contingent claims approach took place in
October 2009 and April 2010. Long-term resident advisors on banking supervision have
been assigned to the BOT since June 1998.
STA: TA missions on Government Finance Statistics took place in March 2002 and
August 2003. A mission to assist preparation for a Data ROSC in 2004 took place in
April 2003. A data dissemination seminar was held in March 2005. A data ROSC was
completed in October 2005. A TA mission in BOP statistics took place in October
2006 and one on government finance statistics took place in November 2009.
XI. Resident Representative: The IMF office in Thailand, which had been operating
since December 1, 1997, was closed in September 2003.

4
ANNEX II. THAILAND: BANK-FUND COLLABORATION
Thailand: JMAP Implementation Table
Title

Products

Provisional
Timing of
Missions

Expected Delivery
Date (tentative)

A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
Bank work
program

IMF work
program

Thailand Economic
Monitor (June and
November 2010)

Published online in
July 2010; next issue
November 2010

Public Finance
Management Report

May 2011

Revenue Policy Review

September 2010

November 2010

2010 Article IV mission

July 2010

Board discussion
expected in
September 2010

2010 Fall Staff Visit

November 2010

B. Request for work program inputs
Fund request to
Bank

Bank request to
Fund

Assessment of
macroeconomic
developments and policies

Semi-annual or
more frequent

Ongoing

Information sharing

Semi-annual or
more frequent

Ongoing

Assessment of
macroeconomic
developments and policies

Semi-annual or
more frequent

Ongoing

Information sharing

Semi-annual or
more frequent

Ongoing

Peer reviewer for revenue
policy review

September 2010

C. Agreement on joint point products and missions
Joint work
program

Modular FSAP to assess
the Specialized Financial
Institutions of Thailand

Throughout 2010

Technical Notes are
expected to be
completed in first
quarter of 2011

5
ANNEX III. THAILAND: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK1
(As of December 31, 2009)
Table 1. Loan Approvals and Disbursements to Thailand
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Agriculture and natural resources
Education
Energy
Finance
Health and social protection
Industry and trade
Public sector management
Transport and ICT
Water supply and other municipal
infrastructure and services
Multisector
Total

Number
of Loans

Amount
of Loans

Percent

9
5
29
11
1
3
―
18
9

409.21
160.72
1,677.30
744.50
500.0
90.46
―
1,291.60
595.00

7.48
2.94
30.66
13.61
9.14
1.65
―
23.61
10.88

1
86

1.38
5,470.17

0.03
100.00

1/ Includes three private sector loans.

The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) pledged $1.2 billion at the Tokyo Meeting in
August 1997 to support the government of Thailand’s stabilization and structural adjustment
program, focused on the financial and social sectors. Lending by the AsDB increased from
$330 million in 1996 to $550 million in 1997, $630 million in 1998 (excluding guarantee
operations of $950 million), and $364 million in 1999. From 2000 to 2002, no loans were
made to the government. The government prepaid $918 million of AsDB’s pool-based loans
in 2002, $84 million in 2004, and $372 million in 2005. In 2009, GMS Highway Expansion
Project, the first AsDB loan for Thailand since 1999, was approved in the amount of
$77.1 million. As of 31 December 2009, about $61.62 million has been provided for more
than 160 technical assistance projects covering a wide range of sectors and activities.
In 2009, AsDB approved a $5 million private sector loan and a $72.9 million partial credit
guarantee to construct and operate a 12-megawatt biomass power plant using wood waste
products as fuel to promote renewable energy in Thailand.
The opening of the Thailand Resident Mission in 2005 marked a new chapter in the country’s
long-standing relationship with AsDB. A Country Partnership Strategy 2007–11, a five-year
partnership framework between the government and AsDB at national and regional
levels, was completed in May 2007. The Country Operations Business Plan (2009–11),
completed in 2009, reaffirmed that the core strategic areas of partnership in the CPS
1

Prepared by AsDB staff.

6
2007–11 remain relevant and closely aligned with the Government policies and action plans
to promote long-term, sustainable economic growth and social development.
Recognizing Thailand’s emergence as a middle-income country, the CPS, at the national
level, supports Thailand’s efforts to enhance its competitiveness in the global economy and
to promote higher levels of private sector investment. Core areas of partnership include
development of infrastructure, capital markets, and environmental sustainability. At the
regional level, the partnership focuses on increasing Thailand’s role, capacity, and
effectiveness as a development partner through cofinancing projects in neighboring
countries, promoting subregional trade and investment, and further developing Asian bond
markets.
Expansion of the partnership between Thailand and AsDB builds upon the recent successful
implementation of major TA projects in 2009. AsDB supported the government effort to
prepare a road map for introducing a single and common fare smartcard that can be used on
the new mass rapid transit line. AsDB also supported the drafting of the new Capital Market
Development Master Plan and the preparation toward the demutualization of the Stock
Exchange of Thailand. An e-learning system network with 30 modules of e-learning content
for basic education was developed through AsDB support, and 50 schools throughout the
country now have access to the system network. Moreover, a capacity development project
for provincial water supply enterprises in the Lao People's Democratic Republic, through
knowledge sharing and technology transfer from Thailand, was undertaken jointly with
AsDB. It enhanced Thailand’s role as a regional development and capacity-building partner
in the region.

7
ANNEX IV. THAILAND—STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of August 2010
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance. The authorities have continued
to improve the quality and coverage of data, but dissemination of additional data would
enhance the basis for macroeconomic policy analysis, particularly in the fiscal sector.
National Accounts: The national accounts are broadly in line with the 1968 SNA, but are in
the process of being updated to the 1993 SNA. While data coverage and methodology have
improved, statistical discrepancies can be reduced further.
Price statistics: The Bank of Thailand (BOT) publishes monthly price statistics and quarterly
inflation reports with sufficient coverage for surveillance.
Government finance statistics: The authorities provide data to the Fund consistent with the
Government Finance Statistics Manual, 2001 (GFSM 2001). Data are contributed to both the
Government Finance Statistics Yearbook and the International Finance Statistics. However,
general government fiscal data are only provided annually and more timely publication is
desirable. In addition, GFSM 2001-based data is not available for the state enterprises, so the
public sector balance is imperfectly calculated in GFSM 2001-basis. Given the growing
importance of state enterprises having timely data on their operations is desirable for more
effective surveillance. General government debt is not available either, and is desirable for
more effective surveillance.
Monetary statistics: The authorities submit the Standardized Reporting Forms (SRFs) for
monetary statistics on a timely basis.
Balance of payments: The methodology for compiling balance of payments data remains
adequate, but the large errors and omissions point to weaknesses in data collection, including
incomplete coverage of transactions by nonresidents in Thailand and by Thai residents
abroad (other than banks) which mostly affect data on trade in services. There is a long lag in
the dissemination of IIP data, which is available only on an annual basis. The last observation
available is 2008. Data on external debt and debt service have significantly improved since
the introduction of a quarterly survey of private nonbank external debt. However, the
breakdown of debt service along the lines of external debt stocks and an amortization
schedule of external debt would allow for more effective surveillance useful.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Subscriber to the Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) since 1996.

Data ROSC published in April 2006.

8
Thailand: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of August 27, 2010

Date of
Latest
Observation

Date
Received

Frequency of
Data6

Frequency
of
Reporting6

Frequency
of
Publication6

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
Soundness

7

Data Quality
– Accuracy
and
8

Reliability
Exchange Rates

8/27/10

8/27/10

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities1

8/20/10

8/27/10

W

W

W

Reserve/Base Money

8/20/10

8/27/10

W

W

W

Broad Money

6/31/10

8/6/10

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

6/31/10

8/6/10

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

6/31/10

8/6/10

M

M

M

Interest Rates2

7/31/10

8/6/10

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

7/31/10

8/4/10

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3– General
Government4

9/30/09

3/31/10

A

A

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3– Central
Government

7/31/10

8/27/10

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

5/28/10

6/30/10

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

7/31/10

8/23/10

M

M

M

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

7/31/10

8/19/10

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Q2 2010

8/23/10

Q

Q

Q

Gross External Debt

Q1 2010

6/30/10

Q

Q

Q

1

O, O, LO, O

O, O, O, O,
O

O,LO,O,LO

LO, O, O, O,
O

O, LO,LO,LO

LO, O, O, O,
LO

LO, LO, O, LO

O, O, LO, O,
O

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered, as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
7
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC (published on April 10, 2006 and based on the findings of the mission that took place during
October 3–17, 2005) for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning
concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O); largely observed (LO); largely not
observed (LNO); not observed (NO); and not available (NA).
8
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation
of source data, assessment, and revision studies.
2

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/387
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 15, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with
Thailand
On September 17, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Thailand.1
Background
The Thai economy has been coming through two severe tests. The first test came when global
trade collapsed following Lehman’s failure in September 2008. This collapse had profound
consequences for one of the world’s most open economies, where exports account for more
than 60 percent of GDP. By the first quarter of 2009, output had fallen by 7 percent year-onyear. Then, just as the economy was beginning to recover from this shock, politics intervened.
In March 2010, a large political protest started in Bangkok, which stretched on until the end of
May, periodically leading to outbreaks of violence. As a result, tourist arrivals, which generate
about 6 percent of GDP, plunged. Confidence indicators fell, and households again reacted by
slowing their consumption.
Yet the economy was able to absorb these blows—and stage a remarkable comeback. The
recovery began in the second quarter of 2009, narrowly and tentatively. By the first quarter
of 2010, it had progressed to the point where GDP had essentially regained its previous peak.
The political turmoil then set the recovery back, but again the economy rebounded. Tourism
quickly began to recover, while private consumption rapidly resumed its upward trend. Most
significantly, the rebound in investment continued at a robust pace, never flagging, even during
the protest period. Therefore, by the third quarter of 2010, it seemed that a sustainable recovery
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summing up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2

was taking hold. International reserves have been climbing, surpassing US$160 billion by
September 2010, and the real effective exchange rate has regained its pre-crisis peak reached
in 2008.
A key factor behind this rapid recovery was the revival in global trade, starting in early 2009.
This revival sparked a surge in Thailand’s exports, even as imports remained depressed,
pushing the current account from near balance into a 7¾ percent of GDP surplus in 2009.
Vigorous export demand continued into 2010, and exporters were able to fill these orders, even
during the political disturbances, because the industrial estates and ports were located far from
the protest zone.
Another factor behind Thailand’s recovery was its policy response, one of the most forceful in
the region. Years of fiscal prudence and credible monetary management (reinforced by an
inflation targeting framework) provided ample space for decisive action. The Bank of Thailand
cut its policy rate by 250 basis points to a historically low level of 1¼ percent. Meanwhile, the
government swiftly introduced a sequence of stimulus packages. The first package focused
squarely on putting spending power in the hands of the population, partly through direct cash
transfers, partly by waiving charges, such as the cost of electricity, for the poor. The second
package expanded spending to include investment projects, particularly on infrastructure.
Together, they imparted an estimated stimulus of 3 percent of GDP in the two fiscal years
since 2007/2008.2
The most fundamental explanation for Thailand’s rapid recovery, however, lies in its sound
economic framework. The country entered the global crisis from a position of financial strength,
on all sides—bank, corporate, and public. So, when the stress arrived, these sectors were able
to withstand the blow, and once the overseas orders came back, they were ready to resume
production. As this happened, the impetus quickly fed through to domestic demand, in stark
contrast to some advanced countries, where households and financial institutions were beset by
balance sheet problems.
Over the short term, Thailand should benefit from some further economic normalization, which
will buoy growth over the next few quarters. As a result, growth this year should reach
7½ percent and 4 percent in 2011, with low inflation. However, downside risks remain: slowing
growth in advanced countries could undermine the global recovery, while political uncertainty
could weigh on domestic demand.
With the economy recovering, the authorities are starting to normalize the policy stance. After
two years of fiscal stimulus, disbursements from the off-budget second stimulus package are
scheduled to fall by nearly 2 percent of GDP next fiscal year, as the special bond funding
authority nears exhaustion. But part of the stimulus measures will be transferred to the regular
budget, reducing the estimated withdrawal to a manageable 1 percent of GDP. The overall
public sector deficit should also fall by the same amount, to a projected 3½ percent of GDP.
2

Thailand’s fiscal year runs from October 1 through September 30.

3

Meanwhile, the Bank of Thailand has initiated the normalization process, raising interest rates
by 50 basis points to 1.75 percent in July-August.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that Thailand has made a remarkable comeback from the effects
of the global crisis and the period of domestic political turmoil. Directors attributed this
achievement to the authorities’ forceful policy response, the revival of export demand, and
sound economic fundamentals that have enabled the export recovery to feed through into
renewed domestic demand. They noted that notwithstanding the current economic strength, the
authorities face important challenges of nurturing the recovery into a sustained expansion and
restoring the economy’s dynamism.
Directors agreed that the immediate challenge is to normalize the policy stance, while ensuring
that the recovery takes firm hold despite an uncertain global environment. In this context, they
generally supported the government’s plan to gradually scale back the fiscal stimulus and
welcomed the Bank of Thailand’s decision to start raising interest rates from their exceptionally
low levels, as well as its intention to phase in further adjustments as evidence accumulates that
the recovery is becoming entrenched.
Directors noted that, with the economy recovering rapidly, capital inflows could complicate
policymaking. They broadly agreed that, in such circumstances, the exchange rate should be
allowed to serve as a buffer. Most Directors also agreed that, should sustained inflows threaten
to create asset bubbles, consideration could be given to introducing prudential measures and
further liberalizing capital outflows.
For the medium term, Directors supported the authorities’ ambitious reform agenda aimed at
strengthening infrastructure and developing the financial sector to help restore economic
dynamism and raise growth potential. Noting the limited budgetary resources to support
reforms, Directors saw scope for reprioritizing expenditures, scaling back subsidies, widening
the tax base and bringing the VAT rate back in line with regional peers. Directors also
underscored the need to further improve implementation capacity for public investment.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ plans to further develop financial markets and ease the
financing constraints that have held back investment. They called for swift action to mitigate
risks from government-owned specialized financial institutions by improving their risk
assessment standards, strengthening supervision, and defining their role more clearly. Directors
also recommended a gradual further opening of the financial system to foreign competition.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Thailand: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–10

2006

2007

2008

2009

Proj.
2010

Real GDP growth (percent)

5.1

4.9

2.5

-2.2

7.5

Inflation
Headline CPI (period average, percent)
Core CPI (period average, percent)

4.7
2.3

2.3
1.1

5.5
2.4

-0.9
0.3

3.0
1.0

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investment (excluding stocks)
Of which: private
Gross national saving
Of which: private, including statistical discrepancy

28.1
21.1
29.2
21.2

26.4
19.5
32.7
26.1

27.4
20.8
27.8
22.3

24.4
17.9
32.1
30.0

26.1
18.0
29.7
26.5

Fiscal accounts (percent of FY GDP) 1/
Central government net lending/borrowing (budgetary)
Revenue
Total expense
General government net lending/borrowing (consolidated) 2/
Public sector balance 3/
Public sector debt

-0.3
18.6
18.8
2.2
1.6
43.5

-1.4
17.9
19.3
0.2
-0.5
39.5

-0.6
18.1
18.7
0.1
-0.6
37.3

-4.2
17.0
21.2
-3.2
-3.6
45.2

-1.1
17.8
18.9
-2.7
-4.5
45.5

8.2
4.5

6.3
4.8

9.2
8.8

6.8
2.5

...
...

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
(Percent of GDP)
Exports, f.o.b.
Growth rate (in dollar terms)
Imports, c.i.f.
Growth rate (in dollar terms)
Gross official reserves (end-year)
(Months of following year's imports)
Exchange rate (baht/U.S. dollar, period average)

2.3
1.1
128
17.0
127
7.9
67.0
5.8
37.9

15.7
6.3
151
18.2
138
9.1
87.5
6.0
34.5

1.2
0.4
175
15.9
176
26.8
111.0
10.1
33.3

20.3
7.7
151
-14.0
131
-25.2
138.4
9.7
34.3

11.0
3.6
180
19.6
171
29.9
154.5
9.9
...

External debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt-service ratio 4/

29.4
11.4

25.0
11.8

23.9
7.1

26.3
6.7

26.1
2.2

Monetary accounts (end-period, percent change)
Broad money growth
Private sector credit growth

Sources: Data provided by the Thai authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ The fiscal year begins on October 1.
2/ Includes budgetary central government, off-budget government spending (second stimulus package),
extrabudgetary funds, and local governments.
3/ Fund staff estimate. Includes general government and nonfinancial public enterprises.
4/ Percent of exports of goods and services.

Statement by Duangmanee Vongpradhip, Executive Director for Thailand
and Pariwat Kanithasen, Advisor to Executive Director
1.
Thailand’s observed economic resilience and stability, amidst an unprecedented confluence
of external and domestic shocks, are not entirely surprising. They are the fruits of continued sound
macroeconomic policy framework and ongoing efforts to strengthen the country’s economic
fundamentals. As rightly noted by staff, the Thai economy encountered the global downturn
without any significant economic and financial stress, especially in the corporate and financial
sectors. Moreover, the timely and sizeable fiscal and monetary policy responses have proven to
effectively shore up economic activities and confidence during periods of economic and political
uncertainties. Going forward, the sound policy framework will continue to focus on safeguarding
macroeconomic and financial system stability while sustaining growth.
Since our authorities broadly concur with staff’s assessment on the economic outlook and
2.
the overall thrust of policy recommendations, they wish to focus on some issues raised by staff for
emphasis and clarification.
Economic outlook and macroeconomic policy
3.
On growth and inflation outlook (based on the assessment in July 2010), while GDP is
forecasted to expand by 6.5–7.5 percent in 2010 and 3.0–5.0 percent in 2011, the authorities expect
that inflation will be contained within the policy target range. Core inflation is estimated to keep
within 0.5–1.3 percent in 2010 and 2.0–3.0 percent in 2011. For headline inflation, the rate is
estimated to range 2.5–3.8 percent in 2010, and 2.5–4.5 percent in 2011.
4.
With overall recovery firming up and with increasingly bigger contribution from domestic
demand, the authorities deem it appropriate to gradually normalize fiscal and monetary policies,
while being mindful that the global economic recovery remains uncertain and fragile.
5.
On the fiscal policy front, the fiscal policy space is considered to be adequate going
forward. Our authorities share staff’s view that Thailand’s fiscal sustainability is not at risk.
Despite the historically large stimulus packages, the ratio of public debt to GDP is expected to be
stable and below 50 percent. This is a welcome development from last year’s forecast that the
public debt ratio would breach this threshold. The first stimulus package initiated in 2009, focusing
on subsidy measures, has already been scaled back. Meanwhile, the authorities are working to
enhance the efficiency of tax collection and broaden the tax base, which will raise the revenue to
GDP ratio, in line of future spending needs, especially infrastructure investment. The government’s
fiscal sustainability objective is to achieve a balanced budget within five years.
6.
For monetary policy, the Monetary Policy Committee’s decisions to raise the policy interest
rate at the last two meetings, totaling 50 basis points to 1.75 percent, have sent clear signals that an
exceptionally accommodative monetary policy is no longer warranted. In fact, the rate hike could
have been implemented sooner had the domestic political situation and uncertainty in the global
financial markets not added significant risks to the recovery process during the first quarter
of 2010. The gradual rate increase has also been implemented with a view to ensuring an orderly

2
adjustment by the private sector, as deposit and lending rates of financial institutions quickly
responded to the policy rate increases. On the issue of “neutral” interest rate, any interpretation
should be exercised with great caution. This is because the structures of financial markets as well
as the real economy may have been altered by the impact of the crisis, to the extent that potential
output and “neutral” interest rate could have declined.
7.
The Thai baht has been allowed to adjust flexibly in line with economic fundamentals, and
it has already appreciated significantly so far this year. On capital flow management, while the
Fund has become more liberal in endorsing macro-prudential and other policy tools to manage
excessive capital inflows, our authorities would welcome more in-depth studies by the Fund on
ways to increase the effectiveness of as well as to reduce the market misperception on the use of
these policy tools. This effort is especially crucial because managing large inflows is a global
problem and common policy challenge for numerous emerging market economies whose growth
prospects are comparatively strong in the present context of a multi-speed global recovery.
Medium-term challenges on infrastructure and financial sector development
8.
Our authorities believe that ongoing efforts to strengthen the infrastructure and financial
sector development will go a long way to revitalize our economic growth dynamism. On
infrastructure investment, while the authorities acknowledge that there were delays in executing
large-scale projects in the past, an increasing number of projects have been accelerated and
completed. On Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs), to strengthen their role for financing
infrastructure projects, the government has set up a steering committee to expedite the
implementation of PPPs by establishing principal guidelines and prioritizing investment projects.
9.
Both the Financial Sector Master Plan II (FSMP II) and the Capital Market Development
Master Plan (CMDMP) are advancing as planned. For the FSMP II, many regulatory adjustments
have been adopted to reduce cost and induce greater flexibility in banking operations as well as to
improve risk management. Another recent accomplishment is the allowance for commercial banks
to extend their scopes of business to include venture capital fund management. Progress has also
been made on branch liberalization and approval of bank partnership with private firms to manage
non-performing assets.
10.
As for the CMDMP, a number of important milestones have already been attained within
the targeted timelines, including partial liberalization of brokers’ commission fees (with full
liberalization being targeted for 2012), the framework governing the liberalization for cross-border
sales of capital market products, the introduction of employee’s choice for members of the
Government Pension Fund, and the trading of interest rate futures (which is expected to complete
later this year).
11.
Lastly, the Thai authorities appreciate the candid and constructive dialogue with the
mission team. They see the merit of a new report format that separately presents staff’s and
authorities’ views.

