August 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/267

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

February 4, 2010
February 4, 2010

February 4, 2010 January 29, 2001
2009
January 29, 2001

Jamaica: 2009 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Stand-By Arrangement—
Staff Report; Staff Supplement; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the
Executive Board Discussion.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2009 Article IV
consultation with Jamaica and Request for a Stand-By Arrangement, the following documents have
been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the combined 2009 Article IV consultation and Request for a Stand-By
Arrangement, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
December 17, 2009, with the officials of Jamaica on economic developments and policies.
Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on January 29, 2010. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



A staff supplement of February 3, 2010 updating information on recent economic
developments.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its February 4, 2010, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Jamaica*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of
Jamaica*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
JAMAICA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Stand-By
Arrangement
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Gilbert Terrier and Dominique Desruelle
January 29, 2010
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Key program policies. The core objectives of the proposed program are to achieve fiscal
sustainability and reduce financial system risks. Up-front fiscal measures include tax
revenue and expenditure containment measures. Structural reforms cover fiscal
responsibility legislation, a central Treasury management system, tax administration, and
the rationalization of public employment and public enterprises. A proposed debt exchange
operation targets interest savings of at least 3 percent of GDP and a 70 percent reduction in
the amount of maturing debt over the next three years. In the financial sector, regulatory
reform focuses on improving consolidated supervision and reducing risks associated with
the securities dealers sector.



SBA Request. The authorities are requesting a 27-month SBA in an amount of
SDR 820.5 million (300 percent of quota). Disbursements are to be front loaded, with half
of total purchases available upon Board approval to help establish the Financial Sector
Support Fund, which will provide primarily liquidity support to financial institutions.



Mission. The last mission took place during December 12–17. Staff met with the Prime
Minister Golding, Finance Minister Shaw, Bank of Jamaica Governor Wynter, and senior
government and Bank of Jamaica officials. The staff team consisted of Messrs. Alleyne
(head), Faircloth, and Guerson (all WHD); Mr. Grigorian (MCM), Mr. Konuki (SPR); and
Mr. Simone (FAD). A parallel MCM mission, Mrs. Mitchell-Casselle (head) and
Mrs. Elliott also contributed to the mission. This mission was preceded by several WHD
and parallel MCM missions during 2009 and two visits by the authorities to headquarters.



Relations with the Fund. The last Article IV consultation was concluded in April 2008.
Jamaica has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4 and does not
have restriction on payments and transfers for current international transactions nor
multiple currency practices. While Jamaica’s exchange rate regime is classified as
floating, according to the IMF’s classification, the regime is considered a “Managed
Floating with no Predetermined Path for the Exchange Rate”. Jamaica subscribes to the
General Data Dissemination Standards. Economic data are generally adequate for
surveillance and program monitoring, although there are areas where data provision
could be improved.

2
Contents

Page

I.

Background and Recent Developments ............................................................................... 4

II.

Policy Discussions and Program for 2009/12 ...................................................................... 5
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Fiscal Policy .............................................................................................................. 7
Structural Fiscal Reforms ......................................................................................... 9
Addressing the Debt Overhang ................................................................................11
Financial Sector Policies ..........................................................................................14
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy .......................................................................15

III. Program Issues ....................................................................................................................16
IV. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................21
Boxes
1.
2.

Details of the Debt Exchange .............................................................................................13
Exchange Rate Assessment and Competitiveness ..............................................................18

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.

Recent Economic Developments, January 2010 .................................................................24
Financial Sector Developments ..........................................................................................25
Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests ............................................................................41
External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests .........................................................................43

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Economic Indicators .............................................................................................26
Summary of Central Government Operations (In billions of Jamaican dollars) ................27
Summary of Central Government Operations (In percent of GDP) ...................................28
Summary Balance of Payments ..........................................................................................29
Summary Accounts of the Bank of Jamaica .......................................................................30
Summary Monetary Survey ................................................................................................31
IFI Disbursements under Program (In US$ million) ..........................................................32
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund Under a Proposed
SBA, 2009/10–2014/15..................................................................................................33
9.
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005/06–2013/14 ......................................40
10. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004/05–2014/15..............................................42
Appendices
I.
II.

The Securities Dealer Sector—Vulnerabilities and Regulatory Challenges.......................34
The Financial Sector Support Fund ....................................................................................36

3
III. Debt Sustainability Analysis ...............................................................................................38
Attachments
1.
2.
3.

Letter of Intent (LOI) ..........................................................................................................47
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) ..............................................49
Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) ............................................................64

4
I.

BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

1.
For many years, Jamaica has been stuck in a cycle of low growth and high debt
dynamics. Its anemic growth (less than 2 percent a year over the past two decades) and
recurring bouts of financial instability are rooted in part in an elevated public debt. Sustained
high public debt service obligations and large refinancing needs have resulted in costly risk
premiums, crowded out and distorted private sector investment, and left the country highly
vulnerable to shifts in market sentiment. Notwithstanding record profits in recent years, the
financial system’s heavy exposure to public debt makes it vulnerable to the fiscal situation,
constituting another significant risk to overall macroeconomic stability.1 Like many other
small-island economies, Jamaica is also vulnerable to recurring natural disaster shocks,
which exact heavy tolls on the economy.
2.
Jamaica has been severely impacted by the global economic slowdown (Figure 1).
Real GDP declined by 1.6 percent in FY2008/09, with economic conditions deteriorating
sharply in the second half of the year. During the current fiscal year, real GDP contracted
further, registering a decline of 3 percent during the first half of the year. Bauxite and
alumina production and exports fell by about 60 percent, while remittances—a traditional
source of balance of payments support—declined by 33 percent. Tourism has also been
negatively affected, although it has proven to be far more resilient than in the rest of the
Caribbean. In FY2009/10, the external current account deficit is expected to narrow from
18 percent of GDP to 9½ percent, as the contraction in imports exceeds by far that of exports.
Inflation fell steadily from 26½ percent in August 2008 to 9 percent in November 2009,
reflecting weak domestic demand and a decline in global commodity prices from their mid2008 peaks.
50

5

Growth
(percent, yoy)

30

GDP (SA), right

3
2

10
-10

0

16

-3
-4
-5

-70
2006Q2

1

2007Q2

2008Q2

2009Q2

Inflation
(12-month percent change)

24
20

-2
Tourism arrivals (SA)
Mining (SA)
Remittances 1/

28

1

-1
-30
-50

32

4

12
8
4

Overall
Core
12 month moving average

0
Mar-07

Feb-08

Jan-09

As a percent of their total assets, banks’ exposure to government debt stands at 20 percent, and that of
securities’ dealers’ at 70 percent.

Dec-09

5
3.
Government finances have deteriorated, constraining the authorities’ ability to
respond to the global shock with countercyclical policies. During FY2008/09, the public
sector deficit widened by 1¼ percent of GDP, to 9½ percent. During this current fiscal year,
faced with declining revenues and a sharp increase in interest costs, the government
introduced two packages of fiscal measures equivalent to 1.9 percent of GDP. Despite these
actions, the public sector deficit is projected at 12¾ percent of GDP in FY2009/10. The
interest bill rose by 38 percent, reflecting the effects of the depreciation and a steep rise in
interest rates. The deficit of public entities remained large, at close to 3 percent of GDP,
reflecting mainly losses by Air Jamaica and Clarendon Alumina Partners.
4.
Over the past year and a half, concerns about economic prospects and the
sustainability of Jamaica’s debt have placed pressure on the currency (Figure 2). As
global credit dried up in the immediate aftermath of the September 2008 shock, both the
nonbank financial sector and the government faced external funding shortfalls. Pressure on
the currency prompted the central bank to intervene in the foreign exchange market and
provide liquidity to securities’ dealers. The central bank also tightened monetary conditions
sharply through higher cash reserve requirements and a 680 basis point increase in the policy
26
rate to 21½ percent. Net international reserves
Market and Policy Interest Rates
(percent)
fell from US$2.3 billion in September 2008 to
24
US$1.6 billion in February 2009, while the
T-bill
currency depreciated by over 20 percent against 22
(180-day)
the U.S. dollar. In more recent months, a drop in 20
inflation has allowed the central bank to cut its
18
policy rate to 15 percent, while some stability
16
has returned in the foreign exchange market. At
end-2009, net international reserves stood at
OMO
14
(180-day)
US$1.7 billion (equivalent to three months of
12
imports—the BOJ’s minimum reserve target),
after having been boosted by the SDR allocation 10
(US$320 million).
Dec-07 May-08 Oct-08 Mar-09 Aug-09 Jan-10
II.

POLICY DISCUSSIONS AND PROGRAM FOR 2009/12

5.
Discussions focused on the overriding challenge of achieving fiscal and debt
sustainability, in a sharply weakened domestic and external economic environment.
There was broad agreement between the authorities and staff that sustaining the confidence
of financial market participants in the current environment required credible actions to ensure
a return to fiscal sustainability. Therefore, discussions focused on developing a coherent
policy reform program that adequately addresses the country’s long-standing economic
imbalances and main underlying vulnerabilities. The authorities’ proposed program focuses
on a three-pronged strategy including: (i) an ambitious medium-term fiscal consolidation,
under which the public sector is to be reformed and rationalized; (ii) a debt strategy to lower
exceptionally high interest costs and help address the problem of the debt overhang; and
(iii) financial sector regulatory reform to reduce systemic risks, in line with 2006 FSAP
recommendations.

6
6.
The authorities’ medium-term program aims at restoring macroeconomic
stability and creating the conditions for a sustained pick up in growth (see MEFP,
paragraphs 5–8).


Growth. Economic growth is projected to shift from -3½ percent in FY2009/10 to
½ percent in FY2010/11 and further to 2 percent thereafter. Like in the rest of the
Caribbean, in the first half of FY2010/11, sluggish employment growth in advanced
countries will continue to weigh on a recovery in key sectors such as tourism, and
remittance flows, while rising global commodity prices are expected to lead to a
deterioration in the terms of trade. Thereafter, the domestic economy would be expected
to benefit from the recovery in the global economy, and growth would rise accordingly.



Inflation. While one-off tax measures are expected to result in a temporary spike in
inflation to 12¼ percent by end FY2009/10, in the absence of strong demand or foreign
exchange market pressures, inflation is projected to fall to an average of 11¼ percent in
FY2010/11 and further to 6 percent over the medium term.



Balance of payments. The external current account deficit is projected to continue to
narrow gradually from 9½ percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to 5 percent over the medium
term, based on the recent depreciation of the currency in real effective terms and the
expected increase in national saving as a result of fiscal consolidation. Better global
conditions and an improved investment climate are projected to result in a recovery in
FDI and other private capital flows. As a result, NIR are projected to rise steadily during
the medium term to the equivalent of 3 months of imports of goods and services, after
declining in late FY2009/10 and early FY2010/11 reflecting the materialization of
contingent external claims to the private sector at the early stages of the program.
Jamaica: Key Economic Indicators
Projection
2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14

GDP real growth rate, in percent
Consumer inflation, period average, in percent
Overall fiscal balance, in percent of GDP
Public debt, in percent of GDP
Current account balance, in percent of GDP
Net international reserves, in US$ billion
Gross international reserves, in US$ billion
Source: Jamaican authorities and staff calculations.

0.6
12.4
-8.2
113.5
-18.4
2.1
2.1

-1.6
20.2
-9.4
124.0
-18.0
1.6
1.7

-3.5
9.0
-12.7
140.0
-9.4
1.4
2.1

0.6
11.2
-7.5
140.0
-8.8
1.1
2.2

1.9
7.1
-4.9
135.6
-6.6
1.3
2.6

1.9
6.7
-2.5
126.1
-5.9
1.5
2.7

2.0
6.3
-0.5
114.9
-5.0
1.8
2.6

7
A. Fiscal Policy
7.
The authorities’ strategy aims at a significant and sustained improvement in the
overall balance of the public sector. The key macroeconomic policies underpinning the
medium-term outlook is a tightening of fiscal policy and a comprehensive debt management
strategy aimed at putting the fiscal balance and the public debt on a clearly declining path.
170
The public sector deficit is projected to narrow
Central Government Debt
(percent of GDP)
from 12¾ percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to
160
Passive scenario
½ percent in FY2013/14, while public debt
150
would decline from 140 percent of GDP to
115 percent over the same period. The primary
140
Active
scenario
surplus of the central government is projected
130
to rise from 6 percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to
7 percent in FY2010/11, and further to
120
Active scenario
9 percent over the medium term. In addition,
(excl. IMF disbursements)
110
the overall deficit of public sector entities
100
would be eliminated by FY2012/13, from
2005/06
2007/08
2009/10
2011/12
2013/14
2¾ percent of GDP in FY2009/10.
8.
To help ensure achievement of the primary surplus objective for this fiscal year
and next, the authorities have introduced a series of revenue and expenditure measures.
In late December 2009, parliament approved a tax package designed to yield revenues
equivalent to 1.8 percent of GDP. The main measures included the introduction of a new ad
valorem fuel tax; an increase in the general consumption tax (GCT) rate from 16½ percent to
17½ percent; an increase in the personal income tax rate for high income earners; and a
5 percent advanced GCT payment on all taxable imported goods (MEFP, paragraph 10). The
authorities recognized that the latter two measures were not fully consistent with their broad
tax policy goals of shifting the tax burden away from direct taxation and of reducing
distortions from the system. They noted that these measures were temporary and had been
introduced only after public opposition and the threat of widespread social unrest forced the
government to withdraw an original set of measures aimed at substantially broadening the
base of the GCT by eliminating most exemptions, including for food items.
9.
To entrench the needed fiscal consolidation, the authorities and staff agreed that
14
expenditure-based fiscal adjustment
Central Government Primary Expenditure Composition
(percent of GDP)
needed to play a critical role. In the
12
discussions, staff noted that cuts could be
Wages
10
implemented in recurrent program spending,
which had risen significantly in recent years,
8
and that better prioritizing could help improve
Goods and serv ices; programs;
and transf ers
the quality of capital spending. There was also
6
a need to strictly control the growth of the
4
wage bill, which had risen significantly in
recent years, and achieve a significant
Capital
2
reduction in the interest bill (see
0
paragraph 17). The authorities agreed on the
2002/03
2004/05
2006/07
2008/09
importance of cost containment in recurrent

8
program spending, and introduced a nominal freeze on the purchases of goods and services;
cuts in travel costs; and a reduction in public utilities costs in ministries and agencies in the
FY2010/11 budget in line with ongoing initiatives, such as the energy saving program
(MEFP, paragraph 11). They also reaffirmed their intention to extend the wage freeze
introduced in 2009 and rephase the granting of previously-agreed wage and salary increases
(see MEFP, paragraph 11). While supporting the wage freeze as a short-term measure, staff
cautioned about the limited credibility of such a freeze as a long-term solution. In response,
the authorities are committed to implementing a comprehensive public sector reform
allowing for a reduction in the wage bill over the medium term. This reform is to be
implemented starting in FY2011/12 (paragraph 13).
10.
The authorities plan to increase spending on the social safety net. Resources
within the social assistance envelope will be reallocated to the better targeted programs.
Spending on these programs will be increased by at least 25 percent in FY2010/11
(0.3 percent of GDP) (MEFP paragraph 12). In particular, this increase will benefit the
school feeding program, which provides breakfast and lunches to children; and the
Programme of Advancement through Health and Education (PATH), which provides
conditional cash transfers to five categories within the poorest income groups. The
government will also be pursuing efforts to expand the social safety net to assist persons
below the poverty line who do not qualify for PATH assistance.

Summary Fiscal Impact of Main Revenue and Non Interest Expenditure Measures
In percent of GDP
Measures
Expected Savings
in FY 2010/2011
Total Revenue Measures

1.8

Introduction of a new Ad-Valorem Fuel Tax
GCT Measures 1/
Increase in the personal income tax rate for high income earners
Other tax measures 2/

0.9
0.5
0.1
0.3

Total non interest Expenditure Measures

1.3

Continuation of wage freeze and rephasing of backpay
Reduction in program spending
Increase in well targeted social safety net spending
Source: Jamaican authorities and Fund Staff Estimates
1/ Includes the increase in standard rate and 5 percent advance GCT payment. See MEFP, paragraph 10.
2/ Includes the increase in cigarette excise rate and other taxes. See MEFP paragraph 10.

1.0
0.5
-0.3

9
B. Structural Fiscal Reforms
11.
The mission underscored that medium term fiscal consolidation be underpinned
10
by a comprehensive structural fiscal reform.
Central Government Fiscal balance
Over the past year, the authorities have refined a
(In percent of GDP)
5
structural reform agenda that targets the root
sources of repeated fiscal slippage. This is necessary
0
to entrench sustainability and credibility to the
adjustment efforts, given (i) poor tax compliance;
(ii) Jamaica’s large and relatively inefficient public -5
sector; (iii) sustained losses at several large public
Budget Outturn
-10
entities; and (iv) an overall lack of expenditure
control and accountability within parastatals and
-15
across ministries.
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

Tax reform
12.
The program aims at modernizing the organization of the tax administration
and improving tax compliance. At present, the administrative powers of the Director
General of tax administration are limited, with large powers granted to the commissioners of
each department. The exchange of information between the tax administration and customs
departments remains limited, thereby reducing opportunities to cross check information and
effectively combat evasion. In addition, the size of the large tax payers’ office is limited and
complex procedures create ample opportunities for non compliance and corruption. Under
the program, the authorities are committed to implementing rapidly the recommendations of
a 2008 Fund TA mission, including by unifying domestic tax administration; granting
increased legal and administrative powers to the director general of tax administration;
expanding the large taxpayers’ office; and enhancing compliance through streamlined
administrative procedures (MEFP, paragraph 24).
Public Sector Reforms
13.
The authorities plan to rationalize the organization of the public sector, with a
view to reducing the wage bill as a share of GDP. The Prime Minister has appointed a
committee to review the existing structure of the public sector which is characterized by
many entities with unclear or overlapping functions. The committee will present
recommendations on a new structure by December 2010. The report of the committee is
expected to specify critical steps and recommendations to ensure attainment of the
government’s objective of reducing the wage bill from 11¾ percent of GDP this fiscal year to
9½ percent over the medium term. The authorities are committed to completing a time-bound
public employment and compensation reform action plan to be implemented in time for the
FY2011/12 budget. This plan will ensure that wage bill spending is consistent with the
medium-term budget framework (MEFP, paragraph 22). Staff also emphasized the
importance of increasing control and transparency over public sector employment and
compensation and encouraged the authorities to expeditiously complete a census of all
government positions and compensation.

10
14.
New impetus is given to the rationalization of public entities while increasing the
oversight and accountability of those that will remain in the public sector. Although the
deficit of these entities has been reduced in recent years, it remains high, at 2¾ percent of
GDP in FY2009/10. In addition, government guarantees on the debt of these entities
represent an important source of contingent liabilities. The government has approved a
reform plan to: (i) divest commercial entities; (ii) merge entities when feasible to bolster
efficiencies; and, (iii) wind-up inactive entities. Past losses by Clarendon Alumina Partners in
recent years are expected to be eliminated as a result of the end of a costly forward sale
contract and the recovery of global aluminum prices. In recent months, two of the five sugar
mills operated by the Jamaica Sugar Company were divested. The government will either
lease the two remaining sugar mills, or continue to strictly enforce a zero-deficit budget rule,
while efforts to divest the sugar mills continue. The government is also committed to making
a decision on the sale or liquidation of Air Jamaica prior to the Board discussion of the
program (an update will be provided before the Board discussion). Negotiations with a
foreign airline company are at an advanced stage and, if successful, government will ensure
that all closing costs are strictly contained.2 The government has also provided assurances
that the modernization and expansion of the PetroJam refinery will not give rise to any
government liability, either directly or indirectly. Finally, the government is committed to
raising the tariffs of the state-owned urban transport company by 40 percent by April 1st,
2010. With respect to the public entities that will remain in the public sector, the fiscal
responsibility framework will strengthen their accountability and transparency (see below),
and the government will agree to performance targets with the management of each entity to
ensure that sought after efficiency gains are realized.
Public Expenditure Management
15.
The authorities’ program seeks to address the main weaknesses of the current
public expenditure management (PEM) system. At present, the PEM system suffers from
severe deficiencies, including a narrow institutional coverage of the budget, mechanisms
allowing for spending to occur without budget appropriations and weaknesses in the
oversight and governance arrangements of autonomous public bodies. These weaknesses
have limited the ability of the government to execute budgets as originally approved. This
has been reflected in repeated spending overruns and frequent budget revisions. The
authorities are committed to addressing these issues in the context of their fiscal
responsibility legislation plans (MEFP, paragraph 26). To that effect, the FRL will expand
the coverage of the budget to all general government institutions; enshrine the principle of no
spending without budget appropriations; require approval by parliament of the corporate
plans of public bodies and strengthen their oversight by the Ministry of Finance, including
their ability to borrow; strengthen reporting and auditing requirements; and introduce
appropriate sanctions and enforcement mechanisms to ensure proper compliance with the
FRL. The new fiscal responsibility law will also introduce a medium-term framework
approach to fiscal policy.
2

Closing costs are estimated at US$200 million, which are accommodated in the government’s financing
program.

11

16.
The authorities also plan to create a central treasury management system
(CTMS) (MEFP, paragraph 27). At present, the authority granted to government entities to
open accounts in financial institutions complicates cash management. This is the case in
particular for local governments and extra budgetary funds that belong to the central
government. This, combined with weak reporting arrangements, has contributed to a situation
in which government resources are idle while the government is engaging in expensive
borrowing. Staff and the authorities consider that the creation of a CTMS and the
establishment of a treasury single account at the general government level could generate
sizeable interest savings while improving the liquidity position of the Treasury.
C. Addressing the Debt Overhang
17.
Achieving a meaningful reduction in Jamaica’s public debt service burden is
critical, both for fiscal consolidation and debt sustainability. As noted, Jamaica’s debt
overhang is very high, with an interest bill of unmatched proportions—equivalent to
60 percent of fiscal revenue and 16 percent of GDP. In addition, a significant bunching of
maturities has contributed to large gross borrowing needs in the years ahead. With 65 percent
of the debt held by domestic financial intermediaries, any debt relief operation needs to be
carefully designed to minimize the risks of financial sector distress.
Public Debt by Instrument and Variability 1/
(percent of total public debt)
PetroCaribe, 5%

External
Fixed, 34%

Holdings of Government Direct Debt 2/
(percent of total government direct debt)

Petrocaribe
6%

Other
3%

Commercia
l Banks
13%

Official
creditors
16%

Domestic
Variable,
34%

Foreign
holders of
Eurobonds
6%
Domestic
individuals
5%
Domestic
Fixed, 19%

External
Variable,
7%

Sec.
Dealers
and
Merchant
Banks
27%
BOJ
9%

Insurance
11%

Pension
funds
4%

Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from MoFP and Petrocaribe Fund. and Banking sector balance sheets,
1/ Includes government guaranteed debt.
2. Assumes 80 percent of Eurobonds are held domestically. Does not include government guaranteed debt.

18.
With these constraints in mind, the government has engaged its creditors in a
comprehensive debt exchange (MEFP, paragraph 14). The Jamaica debt exchange (JDX)
was designed with a view of balancing the fiscal goals with the need to limit the costs to the
financial sector, whose continued involvement in the public debt market is critical. The two
main fiscal objectives of the debt exchange were to achieve a reduction in the public interest
bill of at least 3 percent of GDP in FY2010/11 and a ¾ reduction in the rollover requirements

12
of domestic bonds over the next three years (Box 1).3 The debt operation aims at extending
domestically-issued bonds for new bonds carrying a lower interest rate. The initial yield on
domestic currency-denominated bonds is expected to average 12½ percent across instruments
and maturities, while the average rate on the bonds exchanged was 19 percent. In the short
term, fiscal savings from the debt exchange will be locked in by securing a take up of a
sizable share of fixed rate bonds at lower rates and fixing interest rates on new variable rate
bonds for a period of 3-12 months, depending on maturities. In the medium term,
maintaining the savings will depend on the decline of the yield curve. The operation is to be
par neutral; including the yield curve decline, it is expected to result in about 20 percent
reduction in NPV terms at a
180
180
Dom estic Debt Profile
discount rate of 12 percent.
J$ billions, 2010-2039 160
160
Given that the debt exchange
140
140
is essential to close the
120
120
government’s financing gap
for next fiscal year and over
100
100
Pre-JDX
Post-JDX
the medium term, its
80
80
successful conclusion is a prior
60
60
action under the proposed
th
program. As of January 27
40
40
2010, preliminary results point
20
20
to a participation rate of
0
0
around 90 percent.
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038
19.
The design of the debt exchange critically aims at preserving financial stability
(MEFP, paragraph 15). The par-to-par exchange aims at limiting any direct adverse impact
on holders’ balance sheets, with a view to maximizing participation in the offer while
adhering to Jamaica’s constitutional provision regarding the primacy of debt obligations.
Nonetheless, given the size of the financial sector’s holding of the GOJ debt, the exchange is
expected to impose costs to the financial system through reduced interest earnings on the new
bonds. In addition, financial institutions will be subject to regulatory tightening to better
safeguard balance sheets from underlying sovereign risks, thus resulting in pressure on their
capital base. Possible short run liquidity pressures were also discussed and accounted for in
the authorities’ contingency plans.
20.
To further buttress financial stability, a key part of the program will be the
establishment the Financial Sector Support Fund (FSSF), with resources from
multilaterals. Stress test analyses were undertaken to better assess the vulnerabilities of the
sector. The results of the stress tests were used to adjust the initial debt proposals, with the
aim of reducing any adverse potential impact on the sector. The tests highlighted differences
in vulnerability across various segments of the financial sector and found that the overall
risks of the operation were manageable in terms of financial system stability provided

3

Interest expenditures reported in Tables 1 to 3 reflects relatively conservative assumptions, including higher
interest rates. Staff is waiting for the completion of the debt exchange to update interest expenditures.

13

Box 1. Details of the Debt Exchange
The government launched a comprehensive debt exchange to address its looming debt problem.
The exchange, launched on January 14, 2010, allows the government to reduce its interest bill and
expand the maturity profile of the debt stock. If successful, the exchange will significantly reduce the
budget’s gross financing requirements in the upcoming 2 years and pave the way for fiscal
consolidation and reduction of the stock of debt.
Targeted bonds amount to 65 percent of GDP. The old bonds targeted by exchange include local
currency (including fixed, variable, and US$-indexed debt) as well as US$-denominated debt
amounting to approximately J$700 billion in total. In exchange for the old bonds, investors will have
an option of selecting from a menu of fixed, floating, and inflation- and US$-indexed securities,
subject to the allocation rules. The initial yield on J$-denominated bonds will average 12½ percent
across instruments and maturities, while the initial yield on US$-denominated bonds will average
7 percent. For comparison, the BOJ’s 1-month repo rate is currently at 10½ percent, with the current
(pre-exchange) average rate on the eligible bonds at 19 percent (9 percent for US$-denominated
bonds). To reduce the scope for free riding (i.e., holdouts), the government intends to strategically
exercise the call options embedded in the old bonds. It has also threatened to impose a punitive tax on
income earned from the old bonds.
The exchange is guided by allocation rules that are intended to offer some predictability for the
government. In particular, they restrict any increase in variable rate and US$ denominated bonds in
favor of fixed-rate and longer dated instruments so as to lock in upfront fiscal savings and reduce
rollover risks. To further secure fiscal savings, the coupon rate on variable bonds will be fixed (for
3 to 12 months depending on maturities) at 11¾ percent—the coupon on 1-year fixed rate bonds.
Most new fixed rate bonds will be stripped of call options to make them more attractive for investors
to hold.
The exchange is expected to simplify the functioning of the public debt market. The new
(benchmark) bonds—23 in total, comprised of 9 fixed, 9 variable, 3 US$-denominated, and 2 CPIindex bonds—will replace over 340 eligible bonds presently in circulation. This is also expected to
facilitate a more efficient price discovery and wider use of public yield data for pricing of private
transactions.
The operation is expected to generate high
participation rates as investors have a vested
interest in continued financial sector and
macroeconomic stability. Overall, the exchange
is expected to generate interest savings in excess
of 3 percent of GDP. While the initial
announcement of the exchange led to Jamaica’s
downgrade to Selective Default by the S&P, the
consensus outlook—driven by improved debt
sustainability and prospects of stronger fiscal
position—appears to be positive, with a possibility
of upgrades shortly after the close of the exchange.

B+
7

B+
7

S&P Ratings: Pre- and Post-debt operation

6B

B6

5
B-

B-5

S

S

CCC
4

CCC
4
Uruguay
DR
Pakistan
Jamaica

CC
3
S
SD
2

S

CC
3
S
SD
2

S

1D
S
0

D1
S
0
t=-3

t=-2

t=-1

t=0

t=1

t=2

t=3

Source: Standard and Poor's; Fund staff calculations
Note: Each time period equals three months; assumes Jamaica debt operation
successfully concludes in January 2010

14

Box 2. Financial Sector Impact of Debt Exchange Operation—Stress Testing Results
The Bank of Jamaica (BOJ) conducted stress tests to assess the potential impact of the debt
exchange operation. The analysis was applied to deposit-taking institutions (DTIs), securities dealers
(SDs) and insurance companies. It examined the direct income and fair value loss of the coupon cut
and maturity extension proposed under the debt operation and assessed potential second-round
impacts of the exchange, including declines in market value of all GOJ instruments, margin calls, and
liquidity pressures. The tests also examined the balance sheet impact of a phasing in of risk weighting
on foreign currency denominated debt.
While the financial system is generally robust to the direct impact of the exchange, potential
second-round effects are a possible source of stress. The authorities and staff agreed on the need to
introduce risks weightings in a post debt exchange environment to ensure consistency in the
authorities’ regulatory approach. At the same time, given the extraordinary circumstances, they
agreed that it would be prudent to phase in the introduction of risk weighting.

additional liquidity and possibly recapitalization support was made available (Box 2). These
tests identified the securities dealer sector as a particularly important source of risk, due to
the structure of its assets under management, weak capital base, and external borrowing
subject to margin calls (Appendix I). To further buttress stability, the authorities plan to set
aside US$1 billion from multilateral disbursements for the establishment of the FSSF. This
fund will be managed by the central bank and its resources used to provide liquidity support,
if needed, to individual financial institutions with high participation rates in the debt
exchange and which experience difficulties as a result of it (MEFP, paragraph 16-18, and
Appendix II). Liquidity support will be temporary, with clear incentives for participants to
exit. The government is also committed to resolving any institution which does not meet the
full solvency requirements, in accordance with existing legal and regulatory frameworks.4
21.
Beyond the debt exchange, the government is committed to strengthen debt
management (MEFP, paragraph 20). In the discussions, staff highlighted the need for a
comprehensive medium-term debt management strategy to guide the authorities in the
assessment of cost-risk trade-offs. The authorities agreed that such a framework would be
useful and committed to improve transparency and communication with market players.
Additional measures will be needed to improve the efficiency of the government securities
market and price discovery. The authorities indicated, however, that progress in these areas
would likely require technical assistance from the Fund and other multilateral partners. Staff
stands ready to provide such assistance in a timely manner.

4

The existing regulatory framework allows regulators to take temporary management, which suspends the
rights of shareholders and managers for at least 60 days. If an institution is considered systemic or if its closure
would undermine progress in stabilizing the financial sector, with Court approval, the shareholders would be
removed, the institution taken into temporary conservatorship, and the government would commit to resolving
for eventual privatization.

15
D. Financial Sector Policies
22.
While the Jamaican financial system is relatively healthy, securities dealers are
Jam aica: Financial Sector Indicators 1/
highly exposed to government risk. The banking
2006
2007
2008 Sep-09
system is generally well capitalized and has been
Balance sheet grow th (yoy)
highly profitable in recent years, in the context of
Capital base
13.2
11.7
13.3
11.5
6.0
14.2
57.6
60.4
high interest rates on government securities. At the NPL
Liquidity
same time, the financial sector has remained
Loans/deposits
56.2
63.5
75.4
74.3
insulated from the spillover effects of the CL
Asset Quality
for loan losses/NPLs
101.2 103.4
88.2
78.6
Financial-related problems that have affected other Prov.
NPLs to total loans
2.6
2.3
2.9
4.1
5
Caribbean countries. Nevertheless, as noted, the
Capital Adequacy
Capital base/total assets
9.4
9.2
9.6
10.1
large holdings of government securities by
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)
17.1
16.0
15.2
17.9
Jamaican financial institutions make them
Profitability 2/
vulnerable to a weakening in the fiscal situation.
Pre-tax profit margin
21.8
24.5
21.7
15.5
Return on average assets
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
Given the relative size of the securities dealer
Source: Bank of Jamaica.
sector and inter-linkages within financial
1/ Commercial banks, building societies, and merchant banks.
conglomerates, pressures within the securities
2/ Figures are for the calendar quarters.
dealer sector could spillover to the financial system more broadly. The design of the retail
repo product, the basis of the securities dealer business model, is akin to a deposit— the
customer makes a short term investment with a guaranteed return and does not directly take
on the risk of the associated GOJ instrument, which remains with the dealer.
23.
Vulnerabilities associated with securities dealers will be addressed. The
authorities agreed that the repo business model should be substantially reduced over time.
Addressing these risks must be done in a steadfast but gradual manner —the securities
dealers are an important mechanism for placing government debt. The authorities
underscored their commitment to improve the dealers’ ability to withstand shocks. The
authorities plan to enhance capital adequacy and margin requirements for securities dealers
(MEFP paragraph 33). In addition, they will introduce a temporary freeze on the licensing of
new securities dealers whose business model involves retail repos until the enhanced capital
and margin requirements are in place (MEFP, paragraph 34). At the same time, in order to
provide a viable investment alternative to repos, the authorities will focus on developing the
collective investment scheme sector over the long term (MEFP, paragraph 33 and 34). As
indicated in the MEFP, initial measures will be implemented in 2010.
24.
The authorities’ program includes reforms to strengthen legislative, regulatory
and supervisory frameworks, in line with recommendations of the 2006 FSAP. Current
circumstances have highlighted a number of systemic weaknesses—many of which were also
identified in the 2006 FSAP. In particular, the BOJ and the Financial Services Commission
(FSC) have limited ability to regulate conglomerates, requiring additional authority to request
data, impose prudential norms and identify potential risks, and take action on a group basis.
The authorities are committed under the program to enacting legislative changes, in the form
of an omnibus banking law that would establish a new Holding Company Act; harmonize the
5

CL Financial is a financial conglomerate with operations across the Caribbean that collapsed in January 2009.

16
different prudential standards that apply to commercial banks, merchant banks, and building
societies; and grant regulators expanded powers to conduct due diligence for all significant
shareholders (MEFP, paragraph 30).
25.
Under the authorities’ plans, the Bank of Jamaica will be given explicit
responsibility for overall financial system stability. Toward this end, the authorities plan to
amend the Bank of Jamaica Act to give the central bank a well-defined responsibility in that
area, together with full authority to collect all necessary information from all financial
institutions as well as from the functional regulators of these entities (MEFP paragraph 31).
Under extraordinary circumstances, the BOJ would have authority and discretion to give
direction to all financial institutions in coordination with the functional regulator and to
extend support to all financial institutions. While the BOJ has been able to work with its
existing authority to provide liquidity and monitor stability, these changes will create greater
certainty and efficiency for future possible stress events.
E. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
26.
Monetary policy will focus on containing inflation and supporting the normal
operations of the domestic financial system. In the current weak economic context,
underlying inflationary pressures are expected to remain subdued. A successful debt
exchange combined with the implementation of the fiscal consolidation program under a
Fund arrangement should yield significant dividends in terms of reduced sovereign risks
premiums, thus allowing the central bank to ease the policy rate significantly below the
prevailing level of 15 percent.
27.
Exchange rate flexibility is a key element of Jamaica’s macroeconomic
framework under the program. The
3.5
200
NIR and FOREX Intervention
nominal exchange rate has adjusted
(US$)
Net BoJ intervention (millions, left)
3.0
significantly over the past year and the REER
NIR (billions, right)
6
150
appears in line with fundamentals (Box 3).
2.5
Against this backdrop, and given the potential
2.0
adverse effects of a further weakening in the
100
currency on debt dynamics and increased
1.5
dollarization, the program contemplates the
1.0
possibility of limited central bank intervention
50
in the foreign exchange market. Such an
0.5
intervention will be limited to episodes of
0
0.0
excessive volatility. The reserves target of the
Sep-07
Apr-08
Nov-08
Jun-09
Jan-10
program will help safeguard the adequacy of
reserve coverage.

6

While Jamaica’s exchange rate regime is classified as floating, according to the IMF’s classification, the
regime is considered a “Managed Floating with no Predetermined Path for the Exchange Rate”.

17
III. PROGRAM ISSUES
28.
In support of their program, the authorities have requested a 27-month StandBy Arrangement from the Fund. In view of the difficult economic situation, mounting
balance of payments needs, and precarious budget and debt positions, the authorities are
requesting a 27-month SBA in an amount equivalent to 300 percent of quota, or SDR 820.5
million (about US$1.3 billion). The authorities anticipate that financial support from the
Fund will also help unlock critical financing from other multilateral institutions. In total, the
government is requesting US$2.4 billion from multilaterals to support their program, which
is described in detail in the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP).


Access and Financing: The government envisages the need for financing from
multilateral sources of US$2.4 billion over the next two years in support of their
economic program. Of this, about half would be required upfront to address immediate
budget financing and balance of payments needs as well as the establishment of the
FSSF. Total funding from the IMF is expected to be US$1.3 billion, with about half
provided up front. Loan commitments over the next two years from the IDB, World
Bank, and the Caribbean Development Bank are projected at around US$1 billion, half of
which would be disbursed up front. In addition, Jamaica will continue to draw financing
from the PetroCaribe facility and to strategically access external commercial markets,
which are expected to re-open before the end of the next fiscal year. Remaining financing
needs will be filled through domestic financial sector borrowing.
Phasing and Use of Resources: The phasing of the disbursements is substantially front
loaded, with half of the total program funds proposed to be disbursed on approval of the
SBA by the Board (Table 7 and MEFP Table 1). The main rationale for the front loading
is to secure the necessary resources for the timely establishment of the FSSF. As
described earlier, stress tests point to the possibility that this fund would be crucial for the
maintenance of financial system stability in the period following the debt exchange. Fund
resources are projected to be used entirely for balance of payments support and for the
establishment of the FSSF. Disbursements from the IDB and the World Bank are also
projected to be front loaded in order to be able to fund the FSSF.
Jamaica: Schedule of reviews and Purchases

Date
February 4, 2010
May 31, 2010
August 31, 2010
November 30, 2010
February 28, 2011
May 31, 2011
August 31, 2011
November 30, 2011
February 28, 2012
Total

Amount of Purchase
Millions of SDR
Percent of Quota
414.3
63.7
31.9
31.9
127.5
31.9
31.9
31.9
55.5

151.5
23.3
11.7
11.7
46.6
11.7
11.7
11.7
20.3

820.5

300.0

Conditions
Approval of arrangement
First review and end-March 2010 performance criteria
Second review and end-June 2010 performance criteria
Third review and end-September 2010 performance criteria
Fourth review and end-December 2010 performance criteria
Fifth review and end-March 2011 performance criteria
Sixth review and end-June 2011 performance criteria
Seventh review and end-September 2011 performance criteria
Eighth review and end-December 2011 performance criteria

18

Box 3. Exchange Rate Assessment and Competitiveness
In staff’s view, Jamaica’s exchange rate is broadly in line with equilibrium based on the
methodology in line with CGER. It is customary to take a simple average of three approaches,
which gives an undervaluation of 9.9 percent, within
150
the standard forecast error.1 This average, however,
REER Equlibrium
(index: 2000=100)
140
masks a range of estimates using each approach
External Sustainability
separately. Under the macroeconomic balance
130
approach, Jamaica enjoys a small competitiveness
120
advantage of around 8 percent. The external
Macro Balance
110
sustainability approach gives a competitiveness
Actual
100
advantage about three times as large as that given by
the macroeconomic balance approach. On the
90
ERER
contrary, the equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER)
80
approach indicates a small overvaluation by
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
6½ percent.
Various other competitiveness indicators also indicate that Jamaica’s competitiveness remains
satisfactory. Jamaica’s market share of Caribbean tourism has been increasing and its market share
of manufacturing exports in the world has been broadly stable in recent years, despite some
appreciation in unit-labor-cost-based measure of the real exchange rate during the same period.
0.05

Export Share
(percent of world total)

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
24

Tourism Market Share
(percent of Caribbean Region Long-Stay Arrivals)

20

135
130

Manufacturing Competitiveness
(REER-ULC)

125
120

16

115
12

110
105

8

100
4

95
90

0
1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

____________________________
1

This is based on the estimation method proposed by Vitek (WP/09/165) using the panel data of the mediumterm projections reported in the IMF’s Fall 2009 WEO.

19


Conditionality and Reviews: Quantitative performance criteria would focus on fiscal
targets, in particular the primary balance of the central government, the balance of the
public entities, and the level of public debt. An NIR floor would be set to contain
downside risks to reserves and a ceiling on NDA assets to help preserve growth and
inflation objectives. Reviews would be focused on the progress on critical structural
reforms that are important to assuring sustained fiscal savings over the medium-term,
including the passage of FRL; implementation of a central Treasury management system;
and public sector reform. However, reforms aimed at strengthening financial sector
regulation, especially the securities dealers sector, rise to the level of being macro critical
and are also to be the focus of program reviews. Given the large risks for a proposed SBA
(see below), staff proposes quarterly reviews. In particular, the proposed 27-month SBA
(which covers the current and next budget cycle) alongside quarterly reviews will help
the authorities establish a solid track record of fiscal performance while seeking to
contain risks to the Fund. All disbursements from the FSSF must be reported to the Fund,
daily.



Safeguards Assessment: A safeguards assessment of the Bank of Jamaica has been
initiated. The bank is providing the information requested, and the assessment will be
completed no later than the first review of the program.

29.
Although a Stand-by Arrangement with Jamaica carries significant risks, staff
believes that there is a compelling case for a Fund program.


Capacity to repay the Fund. Under the baseline projections, Jamaica’s capacity to repay
the Fund is good. The external current account is projected to improve once tourism and
remittances recover and, with good economic performance under the program, normal
access to capital access is restored. Jamaica has no debt outstanding to the Fund, has
never had arrears to the Fund, and puts a high priority on its very good reputation with
creditors.



Debt sustainability. Jamaica’s total external debt-to-GDP ratio is high, around
60 percent now and is expected to rise further to 70 percent in 2010/11 after projected
new borrowings from IFIs, including the Fund. However, this ratio would gradually
decline after 2011/12 reflecting the expected improvement in current account balance
(Appendix III). The external debt sustainability analysis indicates that Jamaica has a
capacity to absorb various types of shocks. If purchases are made as scheduled, there will
be a peak in repurchases and charges to the Fund in FY2014/15, but they reach only
8 percent of exports of goods and services in that year (see Table 8). This is well within
the country’s capacity to repay.



Downside risks. The risks of policy slippage are high. The primary surplus targets in the
authorities’ program are high by international standards, and their achievement is by no

20
means assured.7 Significant slippage could occur, particularly given that a high degree of
social and political consensus will be needed to sustain fiscal adjustment over the
medium term. Moreover, the fiscal effort is to be underpinned by structural fiscal reforms
that may take more time than expected to yield budgetary savings, given the risk of
delays in implementation (i.e. capacity constraints, possible legal and/or political hurdles)
and uncertainties related to their costs. Even if the authorities achieve the projected fiscal
adjustment, the debt-to-GDP ratios will remain high, unless economic growth picks up
substantially. As such, the public finances and the overall economy would remain highly
vulnerable to shocks, including shifts in market sentiment and natural disasters. There is
also a risk that the debt exchange does not achieve its objectives in terms of fiscal savings
or leads to significant disruptions in the financial system. The establishment of the FSSF
should help protect against the latter risks. In addition, Jamaica remains vulnerable to
exchange rate and interest rate swings, including from other sources than fiscal slippage,
given its openness and high proportion of FX-denominated and variable-rate public debt.
The significant fiscal consolidation also constitutes a potential downside to growth.
Finally, there are inherent risks to the program associated with delays in disbursements
from other multilateral creditors.


Upside risks. Although there are important downside risks, upside risks also exist. On
the positive side, the authorities’ program aims at addressing key factors that thwarted
previous fiscal consolidation efforts. Resolute implementation of the program, together
with substantial multilateral support, could raise investment and growth prospects above
those outlined in the baseline projections. A virtuous cycle of growth and improved fiscal
results could also accelerate the elimination of underlying vulnerabilities and put the
economy on a permanently stronger footing to withstand exogenous shocks.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL

30.
Jamaica has suffered from chronic low growth and periodic episodes of financial
market instability which are rooted in a large and unsustainable public debt. The
authorities have been forced to confront the global crisis by implementing strongly
procyclical fiscal and monetary policies in order to address large fiscal and balance of
payments financing gaps and declining investor sentiment. At the same time, however, the
global crisis has forged a strong resolve on the part of the authorities for fundamental reform.
Thus, in contrast with past attempts at fiscal consolidation, the program developed by the
authorities aims to address the key underlying vulnerabilities and imbalances in the economy
through a coherent set of policies and structural reforms. Their strategy correctly focuses on
medium-term fiscal consolidation, underpinned by reforms that entrench fiscal discipline; a
debt strategy to lower exorbitant debt service costs and help address the problem of debt
overhang; and financial sector reforms to reduce systemic sources of risk.

7

Although, the projected primary surpluses are high, there are many successful examples of other countries
achieving the cumulative fiscal adjustment projected in this program. See IMF Occasional Paper 246 (2006),
Experience with Large Fiscal Adjustments.

21
31.
The authorities’ objective of virtually eliminating the overall public sector deficit
over the next four years is ambitious but appropriate. The authorities’ fiscal
consolidation program is well balanced, which, in the staff’s view, increases its likelihood of
success. The burden of adjustment is appropriately spread across revenue enhancement,
primary expenditure restraint, and improved public enterprise balances. Through the debt
exchange, creditors are also called upon to assume a part of the burden, while the neediest are
protected by the provisions in the program for an enhanced social safety net. For the most
part, the revenue measures are in the right direction, as they aim to decrease distortions by
reducing exemptions. On the expenditure side, the extension of the wage freeze for the next
two years is important to secure short-run fiscal savings. However, it will be crucial to design
and implement the public sector reform as soon as possible so that the desired reduction the
wage-to-GDP ratio can be sustained after the expiration of the freeze. Staff commends the
ongoing efforts to eliminate the deficit of the public enterprise sector including through
divestment, improved cost recovery, and rationalization of capital spending plans.
32.
A successful debt exchange is an essential component of the fiscal consolidation
strategy and the plan to address the debt overhang. With the huge interest and
amortization costs, a debt operation to reduce interest expenses and extend maturities was
necessary, both to fill financing gaps over the next two years and help build consensus for
sustained fiscal adjustment. Staff believes that the design of the debt exchange strikes an
appropriate balance between the need to maximize fiscal savings and that to avoid
jeopardizing financial system stability. Stress tests confirm that the debt exchange could
significantly impact the balance sheets of financial institutions, particularly the securities
dealers sector, given their heavy exposure to government debt. However, staff believes that
sufficient safeguards for the financial sector will be in place. Specifically, access to resources
in the FSSF will help ensure the smooth functioning of the financial system and sustain
confidence in its overall soundness.
33.
The authorities’ intention to embed the medium-term fiscal consolidation effort
in a comprehensive set of fiscal structural reforms is key. Jamaica has embarked on many
fiscal adjustment programs in the past that were compromised by relying too heavily on ad
hoc adjustment measures and failing to address institutional factors at the root of the debt and
deficit generation process. In this context, staff commends the authorities for tackling the
problematic and non-transparent public expenditure management framework. The swift
passage of fiscal responsibility legislation and creation of a central Treasury management
system will concretely signal the authorities’ commitment to fiscal prudence. The
comprehensive reforms to rationalize the public sector, enhance the efficiency and
accountability of entities, and improve control over public sector employment and
compensation are crucial to sustaining the fiscal adjustment beyond the program period.
34.
Notwithstanding efforts to strengthen regulatory and supervisory frameworks,
further legislative and structural reforms are needed to reduce systemic risks to the
financial system. This includes passing an omnibus banking law that allows for more
effective supervision of financial conglomerates; amending the Bank of Jamaica Act to
establish a legal framework to underpin its responsibility for overall financial system
stability; and taking further measures to strengthen capital adequacy standards for all deposit

22
taking institutions and securities dealers. The current regulatory approach to the repo
business model has been inadequate; serious regulatory reform is required to move the sector
to a more prudent business model. In this context, staff supports the authorities’ plan to
impose a temporary moratorium on new licenses for securities dealers whose business model
is mainly in the form of repo contracts until enhanced capitalization and margin requirements
are implemented. In addition, staff encourages the authorities to move quickly to push
through legislative changes to encourage the development of collective investment schemes.
35.
Although the proposed program carries risks, staff is of the view that these risks
are manageable and that the program merits financial support from the Fund. The
primary surplus targets in the program are high by international standards and there is a risk
that structural reforms may be delayed because of capacity constraints or a failure to sustain a
political and social consensus around the reforms. At the same time, staff is of the view that
the authorities’ program deserves Fund support, given its comprehensiveness and the
ambitious set of reforms that it includes.
36.
Staff proposes that the next Article IV consultation take place within the 24-month
cycle, subject to the provisions of the decision on Article IV consultation cycles.

23
Figure 2. Jamaica: Financial Sector Developments
1400

Global financial turbulence has increased Jamaican spreads and put pressure on the currency and reserves.
95
Eurobond Spreads
(basis points)

NIR and Currency Developments

1200

90
Jamaica

Lehman
bankruptcy

1000

2.5

85

800

80

600

75

400

70

3.0

2.0
1.5

EMBI +

200

1.0

65

0.5

NIR, US$ billion (right)
Exchange rate, J$/US$

60

0
Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

0.0

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

Interest rate pressures in the period following the global financial shock have eased...
45

28

Spreads and Domestic Interest Rates

Overnight J$ Interest Rates
(percent)

40

24

35

20

30

16

25

T-bill
Money market
Spreads, bps (right)

800
600

15

8

10

4

400

5

0

200

0

Dec-07 May-08 Oct-08 Mar-09 Aug-09 Jan-10

1200
1000

20

12

1400

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

... but underlying financial sector vulnerabiliites remain.
15

Securities Sector Leverage Ratio 1/
(percent)
Securities sector
Core dealers

12

12

10

Commercial Banks: NPLs and Loan Loss Provisioning
Prov. to gross loans, percent (right)
NPL, J$ billion
Provision for loan loss, J$ billion

5

4

9

8

3

6

6

2

3

4

1

0

0

2
2004

2005

2006 Jun-07 Jun-08 Sep-09

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates
1/ Ratio of liabilities to capital

Dec-04 Dec-05 Dec-06 Dec-07 Dec-08 Sep-09

24
Table 1. Jamaica: Selected Economic Indicators 1/
Proj.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/122012/132013/14

GDP, prices, and employment
Real GDP
Nominal GDP
Consumer price index (end of period)
Consumer price index (average)
Exchange rate (end of period, in J$/US$)
Exchange rate (average, J$/US$)
End-of-period REER (percent change, apprecia
Unemployment rate (in percent)

1.2
12.2
11.2
14.8
65.3
63.2
4.0
11.6

3.2
14.2
8.0
7.4
67.6
66.3
-0.7
10.8

0.6
13.2
19.9
12.4
70.8
69.7
4.0
9.7

-1.6
12.3
12.4
20.2
88.0
76.3
-10.1
10.6

-3.5
3.3
12.2
9.0
…
…
…
…

0.6
11.5
7.3
11.2
…
…
…
…

1.9
10.3
7.0
7.1
…
…
…
…

1.9
9.7
6.5
6.7
…
…
…
…

2.0
9.5
6.0
6.3
…
…
…
…

Government operations
Budgetary revenue
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Interest payments 2/

26.2
29.5
16.3
13.2

25.9
30.8
18.9
11.9

27.3
31.1
19.5
11.6

26.6
34.0
21.8
12.2

28.3
38.2
22.0
16.2

27.7
34.2
20.7
13.5

27.8
32.1
20.2
11.9

27.9
30.5
19.5
10.9

27.9
28.6
18.8
9.7

Budget balance
Of which: primary fiscal balance
Of which: underlying primary fiscal balance 3/

-3.3
9.9
..

-4.8
7.0
..

-3.8
7.8
..

-7.3
4.8
..

-10.0
6.2
5.2

-6.5
7.0
7.0

-4.3
7.7
7.7

-2.6
8.3
8.3

-0.7
9.1
9.1

1.0

1.5

1.1

-0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Net capital transfers to public entities 5/ 6/

..

..

0.0

0.6

-0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Public entities balance 5/
of which financed with loans and deposits dra

..
..

..
..

-3.4
-3.4

-2.5
-3.1

-2.8
-2.5

-1.0
-1.0

-0.6
-0.6

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

-8.2

-9.4

-12.7

-7.5

-4.9

-2.5

-0.5

Public debt 2/ 7/

119.9

116.5

113.5

124.0

140.0

140.0

External sector
Current account balance
Of which: exports of goods, f.o.b.
Of which: imports of goods, f.o.b.

-10.5
16.0
40.0

-9.7
17.9
42.3

-18.4
18.3
50.4

-18.0
17.0
50.0

-9.4
11.8
38.9

-8.8
12.0
39.0

Net international reserves (in millions of US$)
2,078
Gross international reserves (In millions of US$ 2,373

2,329
2,614

2,083
2,106

1,629
1,664

1,378
2,051

1,078
2,151

1.7
6.9
-5.6
8.6

4.2
6.6
-3.5
10.8

0.9
11.6
2.7
12.5

-13.3
24.8
8.7
11.6

-6.1
5.2
5.1
-1.0

-7.7
19.2
2.2
11.5

7.6
6.0
2.7
13.7

4.0
9.1
1.7
13.1

8.1
1.4
0.8
9.5

3.1

3.2

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.4

3.3

3.2

3.2

714

815

923

1,037

1,071

1,194

Off-budget expenditure 4/

Overall fiscal balance

Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which: credit to the central government
Broad money
Velocity (ratio of GDP to broad money)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of J$)

135.6 126.1 114.9

-6.6
12.6
39.5

-5.9
12.9
39.0

-5.0
13.2
38.4

1,325 1,436 1,705
2,635 2,677 2,616

1,317 1,445 1,582

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based partly on assumptions provided by the authorities. Fiscal years run from April 1 to March 31. Authorities'
budgets presented according to IMF definitions.
2/ Assumes liability management operations on January 1st 2010 involving the par-for-par exchange of bonds,
and targeting a 12.5 percent yield return on domestically-issued bonds and extension of maturities.
3/ Adjusts for one-off revenues in FY 2009/10.
4/ Includes debt issued to BOJ to cover its cash losses and, until 2007/08, debt related to off-budget projects financed
initially by the private sector.
5/ Assumes that any expansion of the PetroJam refinery, costing about 10 percent of GDP in cumulative terms, does not
involve government financing, neither direct nor guaranteed.
6/ Includes 20 selected public entities under rationalization or divestment plans and other public entities.
7/ Central government direct and guaranteed only, including PetroCaribe debt and proposed IMF disbursements.

25
Table 2. Jamaica: Summary of Central Government Operations
(in billions of Jamaican dollars)
Proj.

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

Budgetary revenue and grants
Tax
Non-tax
Grants
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Wage and salaries
Other expenditure
Capital expenditure 1/
Interest
Domestic
Current
BoJ special issue bonds 2/
External

186.7
165.7
20.3
0.7
210.4
116.0
63.1
40.8
12.0
94.4
71.5
65.4
6.1
22.9

211.3
192.5
17.3
1.5
250.8
153.9
78.7
48.0
27.2
96.9
70.3
65.5
4.8
26.5

252.0
224.5
23.0
4.5
286.8
180.0
86.2
64.9
28.9
106.8
75.1
69.3
5.7
31.7

276.2
250.7
18.0
7.6
352.2
226.2
111.5
73.3
41.4
126.0
90.2
89.5
0.7
35.8

302.8
266.6
24.2
11.9
409.5
235.9
126.4
74.3
35.2
173.6
132.5
132.5
0.0
41.1

330.5
303.0
20.6
7.0
408.2
247.3
130.5
76.9
39.9
160.9
121.6
121.6
0.0
39.3

366.4
336.0
22.7
7.7
422.6
265.6
137.1
82.4
46.1
156.9
122.6
122.6
0.0
34.3

402.8
369.5
24.9
8.4
440.2
282.3
145.0
87.9
49.4
158.0
121.8
121.8
0.0
36.1

441.3
404.8
27.3
9.2
451.9
297.9
149.3
96.6
52.1
153.9
114.7
114.7
0.0
39.2

Budget balance
o.w. primary budget balance

-23.7
70.7

-39.4
57.4

-34.8
72.0

-76.0
50.0

-106.7
66.9

-77.6
83.3

-56.2
100.8

-37.4
120.6

-10.6
143.4

Off-budget expenditure
BoJ cash losses 3/
Deferred financing 4/

4.8
4.8
0.0

5.7
5.7
0.0

2.3
0.7
1.6

-4.5
-4.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Public entities balance 5/
of which financed with loans and deposits drawdown
Net capital transfers to public entities

..
..
0.0

..
..
0.0

-31.5
-0.4
0.0

-26.3
5.9
0.0

-29.6
-2.4
0.0

-11.9
-0.5
0.0

-8.3
0.3
0.0

1.6
0.0
0.0

2.9
0.0
0.0

..

..

-68.6

-97.8

-136.3

-89.6

-64.5

-35.8

-7.7

70.8

68.3

37.1

71.5

106.7

77.6

56.2

37.4

10.6

140.0
33.1
16.1
106.9

164.7
59.6
17.5
105.1

99.1
30.3
15.6
68.8

105.8
31.5
18.6
74.3

105.5
23.7
18.5
81.8

145.6
20.0
16.9
125.6

174.7
64.1
23.6
110.6

333.9
62.2
31.1
271.7

345.1
64.1
30.3
281.0

Public sector balance
Net increase in central government debt
Principal Repayments
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Gross Financing Needs

210.8

233.0

136.2

177.3

212.2

223.2

230.9

371.3

355.6

Gross Financing Sources 6/
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Divestment + deposit drawdown

210.8
55.2
3.2
155.6
0.0

233.0
37.4
16.6
179.1
16.6

143.4
24.0
9.6
90.5
28.9

183.2
63.7
34.0
113.5
6.0

209.8
70.3
60.8
166.8
-27.3

222.7
45.4
35.2
149.8
27.4

231.1
76.0
23.6
154.4
0.7

371.3
75.7
31.1
295.6
0.0

355.6
79.5
30.3
276.2
0.0

856
856

950
950

1047
1047

1286
1286

1499
1463

1672
1567

1786
1671

1822
1740

1818
1780

Memo item:
Central government debt, J$ billion
Central government debt excluding IMF, J$ billion

Sources: Jamaican authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes the costs of divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica.
2/ Accrued interest on previous year's BoJ Special Issue Bonds has contractually been paid to the BoJ through debt issuance the following year.
3/ Refers to operating losses of the BoJ, not covered by the BoJ Special Issue Bonds.
4/ Debt issued upon assuming public investment projects carried out by the private sector.
5/ Includes selected public entities which are financially independent from the central government.
6/ For FY 2006/07 and FY 2007/08 the composition reflects the impact of external borrowing for pre-financing.

26
Table 3. Jamaica: Summary of Central Government Operations
(In percent of GDP)
Projection
Est.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Budgetary revenue and grants
Tax
Non-tax
Grants
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Wage and salaries
Other expenditure
Capital expenditure 1/
Interest
Domestic
Current
BoJ special issue bonds 2/
External

26.2
23.2
2.8
0.1
29.5
16.3
8.8
5.7
1.7
13.2
10.0
9.2
0.9
3.2

25.9
23.6
2.1
0.2
30.8
18.9
9.7
5.9
3.3
11.9
8.6
8.0
0.6
3.3

27.3
24.3
2.5
0.5
31.1
19.5
9.3
7.0
3.1
11.6
8.1
7.5
0.6
3.4

26.6
24.2
1.7
0.7
34.0
21.8
10.8
7.1
4.0
12.2
8.7
8.6
0.1
3.5

28.3
24.9
2.3
1.1
38.2
22.0
11.8
6.9
3.3
16.2
12.4
12.4
0.0
3.8

27.7
25.4
1.7
0.6
34.2
20.7
10.9
6.4
3.3
13.5
10.2
10.2
0.0
3.3

27.8
25.5
1.7
0.6
32.1
20.2
10.4
6.3
3.5
11.9
9.3
9.3
0.0
2.6

27.9
25.6
1.7
0.6
30.5
19.5
10.0
6.1
3.4
10.9
8.4
8.4
0.0
2.5

27.9
25.6
1.7
0.6
28.6
18.8
9.4
6.1
3.3
9.7
7.3
7.3
0.0
2.5

Budget balance
o.w. primary budget balance
o.w. underlying primary balance 3/

-3.3
9.9
..

-4.8
7.0
..

-3.8
7.8
..

-7.3
4.8
..

-10.0
6.2
5.2

-6.5
7.0
7.0

-4.3
7.7
7.7

-2.6
8.3
8.3

-0.7
9.1
9.1

1.0
1.0
0.0

1.5
1.5
0.0

1.1
0.9
0.2

-0.4
-0.4
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Public entities balance 6/
of which financed with loans and deposits
Net capital transfers to public entities

..
..
..

..
..
..

-3.4
-3.4
0.0

-2.5
-3.1
0.6

-2.8
-2.5
-0.2

-1.0
-1.0
0.0

-0.6
-0.6
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0

0.2
0.2
0.0

Public sector balance

..

..

-8.2

-9.4

-12.7

-7.5

-4.9

-2.5

-0.5

9.9

8.4

4.8

7.5

9.7

6.5

4.3

2.6

0.7

Principal Repayments
External
o.w. official
Domestic

19.6
4.6
2.2
15.0

20.2
7.3
2.1
12.9

10.7
3.3
1.7
7.5

10.2
3.0
1.8
7.2

9.9
2.2
1.7
7.6

12.2
1.7
1.4
10.5

13.3
4.9
1.8
8.4

23.1
4.3
2.2
18.8

21.8
4.1
1.9
17.8

Gross Financing Needs

29.5

28.6

15.5

17.7

19.6

18.7

17.5

25.7

22.5

Gross Financing Sources 6/
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Divestment + deposit drawdown

29.5
7.7
0.4
21.8
0.0

28.6
4.6
2.0
22.0
2.0

15.5
2.6
1.0
9.8
3.1

17.7
6.1
3.3
11.0
0.6

19.6
6.6
5.7
15.6
-2.5

18.7
3.8
2.9
12.5
2.3

17.5
5.8
1.8
11.7
0.1

25.7
5.2
2.2
20.5
0.0

22.5
5.0
1.9
17.5
0.0

119.9
119.9

116.5
116.5

113.5
113.5

124.0
124.0

140.0
136.6

140.0
131.2

135.6
126.8

126.1
120.4

114.9
112.5

Off-budget expenditure
BoJ cash losses 4/
Deferred financing 5/

Net increase in central government debt

Memo item:
Central government debt
Central government debt excluding IMF

Sources: Jamaican authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes the costs of divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica.
2/ Accrued interest on previous year's BoJ Special Issue Bonds has contractually been paid to the BoJ through debt issuance the following year.
Starting in 2008/09 there is no further issuance of special issue bonds, and the central government pays all amounts due as debt when it settles
the Bank of Jamaica total losses concurrently for the fiscal year.
3/ Excludes one-off grants and nontax revenues in 2009/10.
4/ Refers to operating losses of the BoJ, not covered by the BoJ Special Issue Bonds.
5/ Debt issued upon assuming public investment projects carried out by the private sector.
6/ Includes selected public entities which are financially independent from the central government.
7/ For FY 2006/07 and FY 2007/08 the composition reflects the impact of external borrowing for pre-financing.

27
Table 4. Jamaica: Summary Balance of Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Proj.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Current account
Trade balance
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Fuel (cif)
Exceptional imports (including FDI-related)
Other
Services (net)
Transportation
Travel

-1,186
-2,716
1,809
4,524
1,558
310
2,656
643
-290
1,372

-1,199
-3,008
2,202
5,210
1,730
631
2,849
614
-451
1,639

-2,436
-4,250
2,419
6,670
2,835
735
3,100
455
-564
1,678

-2,439
-4,481
2,311
6,792
2,805
613
3,373
471
-594
1,686

-1,129
-3,259
1,427
4,686
1,687
429
2,571
681
-386
1,712

-1,142
-3,525
1,565
5,090
1,994
338
2,758
811
-359
1,802

-905
-3,691
1,726
5,417
2,107
481
2,829
809
-396
1,888

-846
-3,753
1,863
5,616
2,217
463
2,936
864
-411
1,977

-760
-3,828
1,994
5,821
2,332
468
3,022
916
-426
2,072

1,619
-439
-702
1,589
130
1,459

1,920
-573
-615
1,810
141
1,669

1,980
-660
-712
2,071
134
1,937

1,938
-622
-536
2,107
106
2,000

1,956
-645
-517
1,966
105
1,861

2,052
-633
-480
2,053
88
1,965

2,145
-683
-343
2,319
88
2,232

2,243
-703
-374
2,417
88
2,330

2,346
-730
-420
2,571
88
2,484

Capital and financial account
Capital account (net)
Financial account (net) 1/
Direct investment (net)
of which: One-off sales of shares
Central government (net)

1,634
-3
1,638
608
0
334

1,439
-7
1,446
802
0
-413

1,928
-5
1,933
1,444
0
-194

1,997
28
1,969
629
300
125

867
-15
882
391
0
418

842
-11
853
308
0
166

1,152
-11
1,163
685
0
0

957
-11
967
444
0
0

1,028
-10
1,038
452
0
0

Other official (net) 2/
of which: PetroCaribe
Government prefinancing deposits
Portfolio investment (net)
Other private flows (net) 3/
Overall balance

227
12
-250
196
523
449

470
231
-100
-119
805
241

275
230
350
768
-710
-508

284
325
0
620
312
-442

740
245
0
-323
-344
-263

182
168
0
197
0
-300

188
160
0
289
0
247

153
153
0
371
0
111

158
158
0
428
0
269

Financing
Change in GIR (- increase)
Prospective IMF credits

-449
-449
0

-241
-241
0

508
508
0

442
442
0

263
-387
650

300
-100
400

-247
-484
237

-111
-42
-69

-269
61
-330

2,373
16.9
2,078
-10.5
15.4
22.6
57.1
11.1
11,301

2,614
15.1
2,329
-9.7
21.7
15.2
63.3
18.6
12,305

2,106
12.1
2,083
-18.4
9.9
28.0
77.6
3.1
13,245

1,664
12.8
1,629
-18.0
-4.5
1.8
88.2
-2.2
13,586

2,051
14.8
1,378
-9.4
-38.2
-31.0
65.3
1.0
12,055

2,151
14.6
1,078
-8.8
9.6
8.6
77.3
4.9
13,051

2,635
17.2
1,325
-6.6
10.3
6.4
79.9
4.5
13,708

2,677
16.9
1,436
-5.9
7.9
3.7
81.5
4.6
14,391

2,616
16.1
1,705
-5.0
7.0
3.7
83.4
4.6
15,159

of which : Tourism receipts
Other services
Income (net)
Current transfers (net)
Government (net)
Private (net)

Memorandum items:
Gross international reserves
(in weeks of perspective imports of GNFS)
Net international reserves
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Exports of goods (in percent change)
Imports of goods (in percent change)
Oil prices (composite, fiscal year basis)
Tourism receipts (in percent change)
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes estimates of a partial payment for the sales of a rum company in 2008/09.
2/ Includes counterpart to the inflow for the government's pre-financing in 2005/06, the new general SDR allocation in 2009/10.
3/ Capital flight accompanying the liability management operation is expected to take place in 2009/10 Q4.

28
Table 5. Jamaica: Summary Accounts of the Bank of Jamaica 1/
Proj.
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

136

158

150

145

123

101

130

-92
97
55
28
14
-11
-9
-1
-157
-20
-14

-106
97
45
35
17
-11
-11
-1
-166
-25
-19

-91
95
53
28
14
-13
-13
-1
-138
-34
-27

-74
125
75
46
4
-16
-18
-1
-119
-62
-54

-49
137
80
57
0
-23
-18
-1
-68
-93
-56

-23
137
80
57
0
-19
-17
-2
-39
-101
-64

-49
137
80
57
0
-17
-15
-2
-59
-108
-71

44
26
17

52
31
21

59
33
26

71
37
34

74
40
34

78
43
34

81
47
34

17.9

22.2

-7.9

-4.9

-22.0

-21.7

29.1

-15.9
1.7
-22.7
1.7
0.0
-13.5
-5.9

-14.0
0.2
-9.9
0.0
-0.3
-8.3
-5.6

14.9
-1.8
7.7
-2.1
0.1
27.5
-8.7

17.3
30.3
21.8
-3.3
-0.4
18.8
-28.1

24.9
12.0
5.5
-7.0
0.0
51.1
-31.3

25.4
0.0
0.0
4.0
-0.1
29.3
-7.7

-25.6
0.0
0.0
2.2
-0.1
-20.5
-7.1

Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks

2.0
2.7
-0.7

8.2
5.0
3.3

7.0
2.1
5.0

12.4
3.6
8.7

2.8
3.0
-0.2

3.8
3.6
0.2

3.6
3.5
0.1

Net international reserves

42.9

51.0

-15.2

-8.4

-30.9

-29.3

37.4

-38.2
4.1
4.1
0.0
-32.4
-14.1

-32.1
0.4
0.1
-0.8
-19.1
-12.7

28.8
-3.5
-4.1
0.1
53.1
-16.8

29.4
51.4
-5.6
-0.7
32.0
-47.8

34.9
16.9
-9.8
-0.1
71.8
-43.9

34.4
0.0
5.3
-0.2
39.6
-10.4

-32.8
0.0
2.8
-0.2
-26.3
-9.1

4.7
6.4
-1.7

18.8
11.4
7.5

13.5
4.0
9.6

21.0
6.2
14.8

4.0
4.2
-0.2

5.1
4.8
0.3

4.6
4.5
0.1

2,078

2,329

2,083

1,629

1,378

1,078

1,325

End-of-period stocks 1/
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net claims on central government 2/
Net claims on rest of public sector
Operating losses of the BOJ
Net credit to commercial banks
Of which : foreign prudential reserve
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)
Valuation adjustment
Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks
Fiscal year flows 1/
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net claims on central government 2/
Net credit to commercial banks
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net credit to commercial banks
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)
Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks
Memorandum items:
Net international reserves (US$ millions)
Sources: Bank of Jamaica; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
2/ Includes net unclassified and BoJ operating loss from the previous fiscal year.

29
Table 6. Jamaica: Summary Monetary Survey 1/

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

Proj.
2010/11

2011/12

120

130

132

94

75

51

77

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Of which: central government 2/
Open market operations (Net)
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

108
191
136
-116
106
36
-73
-14

123
194
128
-124
139
47
-85
-19

153
187
135
-94
172
60
-111
-27

223
225
160
-72
221
96
-149
-54

240
242
176
-49
230
100
-183
-55

300
249
183
-17
267
117
-198
-60

321
258
192
-28
304
134
-213
-65

Liabilities to private sector (M3)
Money supply (M2)
Foreign currency deposits

229
154
75

253
175
78

285
189
96

318
203
115

315
202
112

351
232
119

399
271
127

3.7

9.6

2.3

-37.8

-19.4

-24.2

26.7

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector 2/
Of which: central government
Open market operations
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

14.5
12.5
-11.9
-5.7
13.1
3.5
-5.4
-6.6

15.0
2.8
-8.0
-8.7
32.6
10.5
-11.7
-5.3

29.3
-6.7
6.7
29.7
33.0
13.5
-26.7
-8.3

70.7
37.4
24.7
22.2
49.0
35.1
-38.0
-26.6

16.4
17.5
16.1
23.0
9.8
4.5
-33.9
-1.2

60.5
7.1
7.1
32.1
36.4
16.8
-15.0
-4.8

21.2
9.3
9.3
-10.7
37.7
17.6
-15.1
-4.8

Liabilities to private sector (M3)
Money supply (M2)
Foreign currency deposits

18.2
14.2
3.9

24.6
21.8
2.9

31.6
13.8
17.8

32.9
13.6
19.3

-3.0
-0.6
-2.5

36.3
30.1
6.2

47.9
39.0
8.9

1.7

4.2

0.9

-13.3

-6.1

-7.7

7.6

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector 2/
Of which: central government
Open market operations
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

6.9
5.9
-5.6
-2.7
6.2
1.7
-2.6
-3.1

6.6
1.2
-3.5
-3.8
14.3
4.6
-5.1
-2.3

11.6
-2.6
2.7
11.7
13.0
5.3
-10.5
-3.3

24.8
13.1
8.7
7.8
17.2
12.3
-13.3
-9.3

5.2
5.5
5.1
7.2
3.1
1.4
-10.7
-0.4

19.2
2.2
2.2
10.2
11.6
5.3
-4.8
-1.5

6.0
2.7
2.7
-3.1
10.8
5.0
-4.3
-1.4

Liabilities to private sector (M3)

8.6

10.8

12.5

11.6

-1.0

11.5

13.7

43.6
5.2
1841
3.1

51.8
4.9
1921
3.2

58.8
4.8
1865
3.2

71.2
4.5
1072
3.3

74.0
4.3
840
3.4

77.8
4.5
540
3.4

81.4
4.9
787
3.3

End-of-period stocks 1/
Net foreign assets

Fiscal year flows 1/
Net foreign assets

Net foreign assets

Memorandum items:
Monetary base (J$ Millions)
M3/monetary base
Net foreign assets (US$ Millions)
M3 velocity

Sources: Bank of Jamaica; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
2/ Includes Bank of Jamaica operating balance.
3/ Includes net credit to nonbank financial institutions, capital accounts, valuation
adjustment, securities sold under repurchase agreements and net unclassified assets.

Table 7. Jamaica: IFI Disbursements under Program
( In US$ million)
2010
Q2
Q3

Upon Approval
Q1
IFI funding

2012
Q1

2011
Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Total

0

100

150

335

200

100

50

80

87

2437

WB
Budget support
FSSF

250
50
200

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

200
200
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

450

IDB
Budget support
FSSF

400
100
300

0
0
0

0
0
0

100
100
0

50
50
0

0
0
0

50
50
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

600

IMF
BOP support
FSSF

650
200
450

0
0
0

100
100
0

50
50
0

50
50
0

200
50
0

50
200
0

50
50
0

50
50
0

87
87
0

1287

CDB
Budget support

35
35

0
0

0
0

0
0

35
35

0
0

0
0

0
0

30
30

0
0

100

Financing needs

0

1335

100

150

335

50

250

50

80

87

2437

185
200
950
0
350
600

0
100
0

100
50
0

285
50
0

0
50
0

50
200
0

0
50
0

30
50
0

0
87
0

650
837
950

Budget support
BOP support
FSSF
Strategic call
External borrowing on margin
Backstop/Liquidity Funds

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates

30

1335

Table 8. Jamaica: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund Under a Proposed SBA, 2009/10-2014/15
IMF staff projections
2011/12 2012/13

2010/11

Fund repurchases and charges
In millions of US dollars
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of external debt services
In percent of quota
In percent of gross international reserves

2.7
0.1
0.4
0.6
0.1

11.5
0.3
2.2
2.7
0.5

14.3
0.3
1.4
3.3
0.5

Fund credit outstanding
In millions of US dollars
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of external debt services
In percent of quota
In percent of gross international reserves

650.0
15.6
95.1
151.5
31.7

1,050.0
23.3
197.0
244.7
48.8

4,162.2
683.8
429.1
2,050.9

4,500.9
532.9
429.1
2,150.9

Memorandum items
Exports of goods and nonfactor services (in millions of US dollars)
External debt services (in millions of US dollars)
Quota (in millions of US dollars)
Gross international reserves (in millions of US dollars)

2013/14

2014/15

84.1
1.7
6.5
19.6
3.1

343.3
6.4
23.0
80.0
13.1

462.2
8.2
35.1
107.7
17.8

1,287.0
26.9
125.2
299.9
48.8

1,218.3
24.1
93.7
283.9
45.5

888.6
16.7
59.6
207.1
34.0

435.1
7.8
33.0
101.4
16.7

4,788.8
1,027.6
429.1
2,635.2

5,058.4
1,300.2
429.1
2,677.4

5,325.5
1,491.0
429.1
2,616.5

5,606.7
1,318.3
429.1
2,601.5

31

2009/10

32
Appendix I: The Securities Dealer Sector—Vulnerabilities and Regulatory
Challenges
The securities sector in Jamaica has emerged as an outgrowth of high levels of
domestic debt and has benefited from the high yields on government paper. The
securities industry is built almost entirely around one product, a ‘repo’ contract wherein a
customer makes a short term investment with a dealer and receives a guaranteed return,
backed by government of Jamaica (GOJ) bonds, held on the dealer’s books. Dealer
purchases of long-term GOJ bonds are financed with short-term repo contracts (generally
in 30-, 60- and 90-day terms) that traditionally enjoy high rollover rates—upwards of
80 percent in normal times. Investors are both retail and institutional investors that widely
regard repos as a risk-free deposit, despite the fact that investors enjoy returns that reflect
sovereign and currency risk premiums. The existence of the repo model has allowed the
placement of GOJ bonds with the domestic public because it transforms long-term, largedenomination bonds into short-term investments in small denominations that provide
relatively higher returns than comparable time deposits in commercial banks. This
business model has been replicated elsewhere in the Caribbean.
Jamaica’s securities dealer model is fraught with inherent risks and the sector is
vulnerable to shocks with potential systemic implications. The securities dealer
business model bears a concentration risk because dealers are heavily exposed to the
GOJ, and liquidity risk because the secondary market for GOJ paper is illiquid. Given
mismatch between the rollover period of the contracts and the terms of the bonds these
contracts finance, balance sheets are also vulnerable to rollover and interest rate risks.
The dealers are not well capitalized—prudential regulation has not properly recognized
these inherent risks—and lax controls on margin operations have allowed some dealers to
become over leveraged. These are long-standing risks that were identified in the 2006
FSAP. Recent stress tests undertaken by the BOJ confirm that the dealers do not have
sufficient capital to withstand meaningful shocks to the GOJ market. In addition, given
the extent of financial conglomeration in Jamaica, these vulnerabilities could have
negative spillovers that could threaten financial system stability.
Strengthening the dealer business model will be a challenging but necessary
endeavor. However, an accelerated reform agenda could be counter productive given
fiscal objectives and the need to safeguard financial sector stability. The ability of the
GOJ to place its debt domestically relies on the current model and, if it were to disappear
or become significantly more costly, the cost of debt would rise. Further, investor
confidence must be maintained—the dealers would be unable to withstand a modest
degree of investment outflow. Many of the dealers are part of financial conglomerates
and their financial weakness would become a serious problem for related parent banks, as
well as other financial affiliates. Any wind down of a dealer could have a serious effect
on all holders of GOJ debt since the secondary market could not absorb sudden sales (and
thus the reduced price would affect the balance sheets of all Jamaican financial
institutions).
The 2006 FSAP set out a number of important recommendations in response to
risks in this sector which should now be moved forward by the authorities. Stronger

33
prudential requirements should be introduced over a two to three year period, including
strengthened capital and margin reserve requirements and more stringent limits on
margin operations. The FSC should develop more robust supervision (including better
data collection and stress testing) and should adopt a prompt corrective action
framework. GOJ instruments should also be registered and cleared electronically for
greater customer protection. Over the long term, an alternative model should be
introduced where risks are held off-balance sheet (as is the case in more traditional broker
business models) through the introduction of mutual funds, unit trusts and small
denomination GOJ bonds. The structural benchmarks to the program charge the FSC with
introducing new prudential rules and imposing a freeze on new licenses for dealers
engaging in this repo model, until these improvements are made.

34
Appendix II: The Financial Sector Support Fund
A Financial Sector Support Fund (FSSF) will be established with US$950 million in
multilateral funds as a contingent measure to address possible negative impacts of
the debt exchange on the financial sector. The FSSF will be available to individual
institutions that encounter specified problems, primarily liquidity, directly related to the
debt exchange. Access to the fund will be restricted to those financial institutions (banks,
securities dealers and insurance companies) that have participated at a rate of at least
90 percent in the debt exchange. In this context, the FSSF will act as an incentive to
participate in the debt exchange.
The FSSF will be established by the Government of Jamaica (GOJ) and managed by
the Financial Regulatory Council (FRC). The FRC is an existing interagency body,
which will be charged with overseeing the disbursement of funds under the FSSF.8 The
FRC will be tasked with providing recommendations to the GOJ on granting access to the
FSSF for recapitalization; the GOJ will delegate the decision to grant liquidity access to
the FRC. The FRC will use the existing technical working group (TWG) to make
assessments and recommendations for access to the FSSF. Assessments will be made of
the liquidity needs of the system and the financial condition of the institution requesting
support. The work of the TWG will be ongoing, and it will provide periodic reports to the
FRC and regular reports to the IMF on the uses of the FSSF. The TWG will be made up
of staff of the FSC and BOJ and be chaired by the BOJ.
The primary use of the FSSF will be to provide liquidity support in the event of
external funding calls or pressure on deposits or assets under management that are
attributable to the debt exchange. The terms of liquidity support will be more favorable
than those currently offered by the BOJ, i.e., GOJ collateral will be accepted at par value
and without a hair cut. The interest rate will be set to avoid any fiscal costs. Liquidity will
be repaid within 6 months or else a punitive rate will begin to apply. Liquidity support (in
terms of capital) above a threshold level will trigger increased regulatory intervention. A
regulatory circular will be issued specifying supervisory actions to be taken when
emergency liquidity support reaches predefined trigger levels. Banks and non bank
financial institutions will be intervened if a maximum level is breached. At an aggregate
level, the government will be required to report to Fund staff when 50 percent of the
FSSF funds have been disbursed, at which time the use of the FSSF will be reviewed.
The uses and funding of the FSSF will also be re-examined during regular program
reviews.
Following current practices, supervisors will require undercapitalized banks to seek
additional funds from shareholders and other external sources. They will also fully
implement the ‘ladder of enforcement’ as circumstances warrant. However, in order
to support financial stability, under certain limited circumstances, systemically important
8

The BOJ (which acts as chair), the FSC, the Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Solicitor General,
and the Finance Secretary are all represented on the FRC.

35
institutions that are unable to raise external resources, may be permitted to receive capital
injections from the GOJ using the FSSF, provided the need for capital is the result of the
debt exchange. The use of FSSF resources for such capital injections would be a rare step
taken as a last resort and would be subject to prior consultation with Fund staff. The need
for capital injections from the government could arise owing to the challenges of finding
additional capital in current global conditions, particularly for domestic institutions. The
GOJ will hold equity or preferred shares, or subordinated debt, in financial institutions
that receive recapitalization funds.
All financial institutions that access the FSSF for capital support would be subject
to enhanced monitoring by the BOJ or FSC. Deposit taking institutions and nonbank
institutions will be required to submit a five-year business plan by December 2010 and
December 2011 respectively, substantiating their viability and ability to comply with the
minimum capital requirements over the 2 to 3-year horizon. GOJ capitalization support
would come with additional strings. GOJ will place representatives on the entity’s board
of directors, and supervisory oversight will be more intensive, reporting requirements
more demanding, while operations may be restricted, depending on circumstances.9

9

When capital levels fall below regulatory requirements, the BOJ and FSC have indicated that they will
enforce the ladder of enforcement, which includes placing restrictions on entities’ activities when capital
falls below 8 percent, and if capital falls to 5 percent or below the BOJ and FSC will initiate additional
measures, i.e. temporary management and if necessary, permanent intervention measures.

36
Appendix III: Debt Sustainability Analysis
Public Debt Sustainability
Public debt is expected to decline under the IMF program policies from 140 percent
of GDP at end FY2009/10 to 115 percent of GDP in four years. This is predicated on a
sustained strengthening of consolidated government fiscal balances and prudent monetary
policy management given the debt’s sensitivity to exchange rate and interest rate shocks.
The debt exchange—a prior action for the program—provides significant financing relief
in the near term, given (i) lower interest coupons yielding interest savings of more than
3 percent of GDP in 2010, assuming participation of at least 90 percent, and (ii) the
extension of maturities to reduce domestic debt rollover obligations by 75 percent over
the next three years. However, these results reflect more pessimistic assumptions than
expected under the debt exchange, including a participation rate of 80 percent, implying
higher average interest costs and rollover pressures in the first three years. This financing
relief, along with the set of fiscal and financial sector measures underpinning the
program, is crucial to allow domestic interest rates to decline from over 20 percent in
FY2009/10 to below 12 percent levels in the short term, and to continue declining
thereafter. Sustaining the interest saving into the medium term would depend critically on
the projected decline in the yield curve.
The debt exchange is expected to result in a significant extension of maturities and
interest savings. For example, in the case in which maturities of new bonds remain at the
shortest tenor under the allocation rules, eligible instruments would have an average
maturity of 8.7 years, as opposed to 5.3 years. The currency and interest rate composition
of the new instruments, however, is expected to remain similar to before the exchange
given the allocation rules (see Box 1).
Given Jamaica’s debt overhang problem, public debt sustainability risks remain
high. Bound tests indicate public debt sustainability is highly vulnerable to exchange
rate, interest rate, and primary balance shocks. A 30 percent nominal exchange rate
depreciation shock in FY2010/11 would result in a public debt-to-GDP ratio of
180 percent. Vulnerability to primary balance shocks illustrates the importance of
successfully implementing program reforms, including eliminating liabilities originating
in the public entities. Interest rate shocks are a major vulnerability given that over half of
domestic bonds are set at variable rates, even post debt exchange.
External Debt Sustainability
External debt appears to be sustainable. Despite a sharp increase in external debt at
end FY2009/10 to near 70 percent of GDP—largely reflecting disbursements from
multilaterals and an exchange rate depreciation of over 20 percent in the second half of
FY2008/09—external debt is expected to turn downwards. This is predicated on the basis
of a sustained improvement of the current account over the medium term, resulting from:
(i) a consolidated government fiscal adjustment of 12 percentage points of GDP over the
next four years, and, (ii) a recovery in exports and GDP growth as world conditions

37
normalize. Challenges will remain, however, given that the stock of net international
reserves is expected to decline to below prudent levels under the program. As a result,
external debt sustainability remains conditional on a successful implementation of the
program by the authorities, including from implementation of structural fiscal and
financial sector reforms.
Bound tests indicate that external debt appears most vulnerable to exchange rate
shocks and to current account shocks. This includes shocks from natural disasters and
from imported commodity prices, particularly oil and food. The recovery in bauxite
prices is an upside risk.

38

Table 9. Jamaica: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005/06-2013/14
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

1 Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
Government debt 1/
Of which : foreign-currency denominated
Government guaranteed debt 1/
2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

Projections
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
140.0 140.0 135.6 126.1 114.9
2.7
121.2 120.4 115.6 106.7
96.1
68.8
73.2
71.0
65.9
60.6
18.9
19.6
20.0
19.4
18.8

119.9
111.8
55.0
8.1

116.5
106.2
54.4
10.3

113.5
101.1
51.2
12.4

124.0
107.9
62.4
16.1

-2.5
6.7
-9.9
26.2
16.3
16.6
0.8
2.1
-1.3
15.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-9.2

-5.5
-7.2
-7.0
25.9
18.9
-0.2
-2.2
1.2
-3.4
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

-5.2
-5.4
-7.8
27.3
19.5
1.9
-0.9
-0.3
-0.6
2.7
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.3

6.9
10.5
-4.8
26.6
21.8
14.7
1.2
-0.4
1.6
13.5
0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0
-3.6

13.2
7.7
-6.2
28.3
22.0
12.8
12.8
9.1
3.6
...
1.2
1.2
0.0
0.0
5.5

-0.7
-6.0
-7.0
27.7
20.7
1.0
1.0
1.6
-0.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.3

-4.8
-7.0
-7.7
27.8
20.2
0.7
0.7
2.7
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

-8.9
-7.6
-8.3
27.9
19.5
0.7
0.7
2.7
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.3

-10.6
-8.6
-9.1
27.9
18.8
0.5
0.5
2.4
-1.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.0

458.3

449.4

415.4

465.5

495.3

505.9

487.4

452.2

412.0

24.0
2.7

26.5
3.3

15.6
2.1

17.1
2.3

19.0
2.3

18.7
2.4

17.5
2.4

25.7
3.7

22.5
3.4

140.0
140.0

137.5
150.1

130.8
147.0

119.8
139.7

108.1
131.4

-3.5
...
...
...
7.0
-2.6
-6.2

0.6
...
...
...
10.9
-5.5
-7.0

1.9
...
...
...
8.3
-0.8
-7.7

1.9
...
...
...
7.7
-1.3
-8.3

2.0
...
...
...
7.4
-1.7
-9.1

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2008-2012

-0.1
2.8

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

1.2
13.0
2.2
-27.1
10.8
-1.3
-9.9

3.2
12.1
1.5
-3.4
10.6
19.9
-7.0

0.6
12.3
-0.2
-4.6
12.5
4.0
-7.8

-1.6
13.5
-0.6
-19.5
14.1
10.1
-4.8

1/ Central government and government guaranteed debt on gross basis. From FY 2002/03, includes debt issued to the BoJ to cover its cash losses and related capitalized interest.
FY 2006/07 debt includes US$350 million in prefinancing. The primary balance includes budgetary primary balance and off-budget expenditure. Dynamics do not drive Guaranteed Debt.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP. Guaranteed debt added for presentational purposes.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

39
Figure 3. Jamaica: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
160
150
140

Gross financing need
under baseline(right)
Baseline

130

28

150
23
18

120

100

13
8

90
3

80
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13

Growth shock (in percent per year)
150

Growth
shock

140

Baseline

110
100

Baseline: 2.4
Scenario: 5.2

90

Historical: 1.1

80
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary
150

No policy change

PB shock

140
130

130
120

Baseline

120

Baseline

110

110
Baseline: 1.7
Scenario: 1.0

100

1.2

90

Historical:

80

Baseline:
Scenario:
Historical:

8.2
7.0
8.3

80

2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13
Combined shock 2/

2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

160
150

130

160

160

90

i-rate
shock

140

120
Historical

110

100

160

200
Combine
d shock

180

30 % depreciation

140
160

130
120
110

Baseline

140

contingen
t liabilities
shock

120

Baseline

100
90
80
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13

100
80
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staf f estimates.
1/ Shaded areas and the Baseline projection line represent actual Central Government Debt data.
Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes represent
average projections f or the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented . Tenyear historical average f or the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary
balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities
occur in 2009, with real depreciation def ined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage f all
in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inf lation (based on GDP def lator).

Table 10. Jamaica: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004/05-2014/15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

1 Baseline: External debt
2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
9
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/
External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

48.7

49.3

51.0

50.1

51.4

69.4

70.0

69.4

65.9

60.7

56.3

1.3
-2.5
3.0
15.0
37.3
52.3
-5.2
-0.3
3.4
-0.3
-3.4
3.8

0.7
1.0
7.0
18.3
37.4
55.7
-5.4
-0.6
3.5
-0.5
-3.5
-0.4

1.7
-0.8
6.1
19.5
39.9
59.4
-6.5
-0.4
3.6
-1.5
-2.6
2.5

-0.9
3.9
14.4
28.7
39.3
68.0
-10.9
0.4
4.0
-0.3
-3.3
-4.7

1.2
12.1
14.2
29.5
37.2
66.7
-4.6
2.5
3.8
0.8
-2.1
-10.9

18.0
8.1
5.5
21.4
34.5
55.9
-3.2
5.9
3.9
2.0
...
9.9

0.6
6.0
5.4
20.8
34.5
55.3
-2.4
3.0
3.4
-0.4
...
-5.4

-0.5
0.4
3.9
21.0
34.9
56.0
-5.0
1.4
2.7
-1.2
...
-0.9

-3.5
1.6
3.3
20.1
35.1
55.2
-3.1
1.3
2.6
-1.2
...
-5.1

-5.2
-5.8
2.5
19.2
35.1
54.3
-9.6
1.3
2.5
-1.3
...
0.6

-4.4
-6.4
1.4
17.8
35.7
53.4
-9.1
1.3
2.5
-1.2
...
1.9

130.6

132.0

127.9

127.6

138.2

201.0

202.9

198.8

187.5

172.8

157.7

1.3
12.9

1.8
15.7

2.2
17.6

3.0
22.4

2.9
21.3

1.4
12.0

1.4
10.7

1.6
11.6

1.5
10.3

1.4
9.2

1.6
10.3

69.4

70.5

73.4

72.1

76.5

81.6

-3.5
-8.1
6.8
-17.6
-25.6
-5.5
3.2

0.6
7.6
5.2
8.1
7.1
-5.4
2.4

1.9
3.1
4.0
6.4
6.3
-3.9
5.0

1.9
3.1
3.9
5.6
3.6
-3.3
3.1

2.0
3.3
4.0
5.3
3.6
-2.5
9.6

2.0
2.6
4.3
6.3
2.9
-1.4
9.1

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-9.3

40

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

Projections
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15

-4.9

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

0.8
7.8
7.9
5.1
10.3
-3.0
5.2

1.2
7.8
7.7
9.5
16.4
-7.0
5.4

3.2
5.5
8.0
16.2
16.0
-6.1
6.5

0.6
7.0
8.4
6.0
23.2
-14.4
10.9

-1.6
4.3
7.7
-3.0
0.6
-14.2
4.6

1/ Derived as [r - g - (1+g) + (1+r)]/(1+g++g) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
 = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and  = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-(1+g(1+r1+g++g) times previous period debt stock. increases with an appreciating domestic currency (> 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

41
Figure 4. Jamaica: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

Interest Rate Shock (in percent)

115
Gross financing
need under
baseline (right)

105

24

115

22

105

20

95

18

85
Historical

75

71
Baseline

65

16

85

14

75

12

56

10

55
45

95

4.3
4.7

Historical:

7.4

i-rate
shock

65

8

55

6

45

2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15

Baseline:
Scenario:

57
Baseline
56

2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15

Growth Shock (in percent per year)
115

115
105
95

Baseline:

1.7

Scenario:

1.0

Historical:

1.2

105
95

Growth
shock

75
65

75
57

Baseline

55

56

45

65

2007/08

2010/11

2013/14

Baseline
56

2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15

Real Depreciation Shock 3/
115

105

105

95

95

85

85

55

67

45

Combined Shock 2/

65

CA shock

55

115

75

Historical: -6.7

85

85

2004/05

Baseline: -3.3
Scenario: -5.6

Combined
shock

30 %
depreciation

81

75
63

Baseline
56

45
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15

65
55

Baseline
56

45
2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15

Sources: International Monetary Fund; Country desk data; and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures
in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented.
Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2009.

42

ANY REPLY OR SUBSEQUENT REFERENCE SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO THE
FINANCIAL SECRETARY AND THE FOLLOWING REFERENCE NUMBER QUOTED:Telephone No. 92-28600-16
Website: http://www.mof.gov.jm
Email: info@mof.gov.jm

MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE
30 NATIONAL HEROES CIRCLE
P.O. BOX 512
KINGSTON
JAMAICA

Kingston, Jamaica
January 15, 2010
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
For many years, Jamaica has struggled with the twin challenges of low economic growth and high public
debt. As a result of the fragile economic situation and underlying vulnerabilities, the economy has been
seriously affected by the ongoing global economic and financial crisis. Growth is projected to fall a
cumulative 5 percent between 2008 and 2009. Moreover, the high debt levels and limited access to
financing have left us no other option but the implementation of short term pro-cyclical fiscal and
monetary policies which, in turn, have reinforced the negative effects of the global shocks on the
economy.
The main objective of this programme is to restore macroeconomic stability and create conditions for
strong and sustained growth and to enable the economy to benefit from the recovery in the global
economy. Through the sustained implementation of a strong and credible fiscal adjustment programme
and key structural fiscal reforms, the programme puts the public debt levels on a clearly downward
path. This fiscal programme will be supplemented upfront by decisive action to tackle, in close
coordination with creditors, the large and expensive debt burden.
The Government of Jamaica is deeply committed to the objectives and measures underlying this
programme, and intends to pursue them regardless of any formal lending arrangement with the
International Monetary Fund (Fund). In the current context, however, we believe that support from the
Fund and other multilateral financial institutions will help further boost investor confidence, including
the provision of a liquidity cushion to avoid shortfalls in external inflows that could put the programme
at risk. Given the broad-based nature of our reform agenda, we believe that sustained multilateral
engagement over the medium term is essential, including through the provision of technical assistance
in priority areas. To this end, we are requesting a 27-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) through March
2012 in an amount equivalent to SDR 820.5 million or 300 percent of quota (about US$1,300 million)
that will support the programme detailed in the attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial
Policies (MEFP).
The Government believes that the policies described in the MEFP are adequate to achieve the
programme’s objectives, however, if necessary, the Government stands ready to take any additional

43

measures that may be required. The Government will consult with the Fund on the adoption of these
measures and in advance of revisions to the policies contained in the MEFP, in accordance with the
Fund’s policies on such consultation. The Government will also provide the Fund staff with all the
relevant information required to complete programme reviews and monitor performance.
The authorities will observe the standard performance criteria against imposing or intensifying exchange
restrictions, introducing or modifying multiple currency practices, concluding bilateral payments
agreements that are inconsistent with Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, and imposing or
intensifying import restrictions for balance of payments reasons.
During the period covered by the programme, there will be quarterly quantitative performance criteria
(Table 2) and structural benchmarks (Table 3). During 2010, there will be quarterly reviews to be
completed by end-May, end-August, and end-November. These reviews will be associated with the
observance of the relevant performance criteria.
The Fund is hereby authorized to publish this letter and the attached MEFP, to facilitate access to and
review of Jamaica’s policies both locally and internationally.

Very truly yours,
/s/
Audley Shaw, MP
Minister of Finance and the Public Service
Jamaica

Very truly yours,
/s/
Brian Wynter
Governor, Bank of Jamaica
Jamaica

44
JAMAICA—MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
I.

BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

 Jamaica faces severe economic challenges. During most of the past decade, economic
growth has been low, at 1 percent a year on average. At the same time, inflation has remained
relatively high, while the external current account balance registered large deficits. Anaemic
growth and recurring bouts of financial market instability have been rooted in increasingly high
levels of public debt, which reached 135 percent of GDP at the end of 2009. Sustained high debt
service obligations and large refinancing needs have resulted in costly risk premiums and
helped crowd out private sector investment. The high debt levels have also exposed the country
to adverse shifts in market sentiment. With interest payments alone accounting for 60 percent of
government revenues, the fiscal accounts are stretched too thin to pursue productivityenhancing social and infrastructure investment.
 As a result of these structural vulnerabilities, the Jamaican economy has been
deeply affected by the global crisis. Real GDP contracted by 1½ percent in FY 2008/09 and is
projected to fall by an additional 3½ percent in FY 2009/10. Tourism, remittances, and mining
have been negatively impacted by the weakening in the global environment. At the beginning of
the crisis, the Jamaican currency came under intense pressure, depreciating by 22 percent
against the U.S. dollar. This reflected investors’ concerns about potential fiscal and external
financing gaps as global private credit dried up. International reserves, which initially fell
significantly, have stabilized at a lower level in recent months. The Bank of Jamaica (BOJ)
responded decisively to stabilize financial market conditions. The BOJ raised interest rates
above 20 percent; intervened in the foreign exchange market to limit excessive volatility in the
value of the currency; and established special facilities and procedures to provide liquidity and
ensure normal functioning of the interbank and foreign exchange markets. The global crisis has
also negatively affected the fiscal accounts, with lower revenue and a significantly higher
interest bill. As a result, the budget deficit for FY 2009/10 is projected to exceed the original
budget target by a wide margin. The government is therefore confronting large financing gaps
in a context where external markets remain closed.
II.

PROGRAMME OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

 The government is firmly committed to implementing policy reforms to
fundamentally transform the Jamaican economy and create the conditions for strong and
sustained growth. The overarching objectives of this programme are to put the public
debt/GDP ratio firmly on a downward trajectory, entrench fiscal discipline and accountability,
and significantly raise real GDP growth rates. The programme rests on three central and
interrelated pillars: (i) an ambitious fiscal consolidation strategy, focused on streamlining
expenditure and reforming the public sector, including the divestment of non-core public
bodies; (ii) a comprehensive debt management strategy that decisively addresses the debt
overhang; and (iii) reforms to further strengthen the financial system. Monetary policy will aim
at bringing inflation down to mid-single digit levels and maintaining it at those levels, within
the context of exchange rate flexibility.

45
 To help soften any negative impact on the poor, the programme includes important
measures to strengthen the social safety net. The government is well aware that adverse
economic conditions are generating drastic changes in Jamaica. The contraction in activity has
led to a significant increase in layoffs, exacerbating the already high unemployment rate. The
most vulnerable social groups, with low levels of human capital, are most affected by the
decline in economic activity. The programme has been designed to ensure that the adjustment
burden is effectively shared across society and economic agents. Safeguards have been included
to ensure that the social safety net is not only preserved but broadened, with special attention
being given to enhancing those social programmes that are well targeted and far-reaching.
III. MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
 The programme aims at yielding permanent growth dividends by raising growth to
2 percent by FY2011/12, with upside risks to the outlook over the longer-term. After
registering a decline during this fiscal year, real GDP is projected to rise by ½ percent in
FY2010/11. The growth outlook over the programme period reflects both a gradual pick-up in
activity in the mining sector, as global demand recovers, and continued investment and growth
in Jamaica’s highly competitive tourism sector. Restoring fiscal and debt sustainability will help
reduce sovereign risk premiums and boost private sector investment. This will benefit
agriculture and other activities with linkages to the tourism sector.
 Under the programme, inflation will trend down to the 6–7 percent range over the
medium term. Despite a temporary increase in inflation this fiscal year, resulting from the
introduction of new tax measures, underlying price pressures will remain limited, given the
absence of strong demand or foreign exchange market pressures. In this context, inflation is
projected to fall from 12 percent in FY 2009/10 to less than 8 percent in FY2010/11. In
subsequent years, monetary policy will continue to focus on quickly bringing inflation to 6
percent.
 Fiscal policy is aimed at eliminating the overall public sector deficit over the
medium term and putting the debt-to-GDP ratio on a clear downward trajectory. The
overall public sector deficit is projected to fall from 12¾ percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to 1
percent in FY2013/14. This improvement is consistent with a significant reduction in the
interest bill and an increase from 6 percent of GDP to 9 percent in the primary surplus of the
central government. The debt-to-GDP will decline steadily from 140 percent in FY2009/10 to
below 120 percent over the next four years. Fiscal consolidation measures will be underpinned
by core structural reforms—fiscal responsibility legislation, central treasury management, and
public bodies and employment reforms—that entrench fiscal discipline.
 In this context, the balance of payments is expected to improve markedly over the
medium term. Higher national savings as a result of fiscal adjustment, the gradual recovery in
world demand, and a recovery in remittances are projected to help narrow the current account
deficit from about 9½ percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to about 8¾ percent in FY2010/11 and,
further, to around 5 percent of GDP over the medium term. This improvement, coupled with a
projected recovery in foreign direct investment, will result in solid overall balance of payments
surpluses beginning in FY2011/12. Gross international reserves are projected to remain at

46
around 3¼–4 months of imports of goods and services during the programme period and stay
around 3¾ months over the medium term.
IV. MACROECONOMIC PROGRAMME
A.

Fiscal Policy

 The government is committed to reducing the overall public sector deficit from
12¾ percent of GDP in the current fiscal year to 5 percent in FY2011/12. The public debt
ratio is projected to fall from 140 percent of GDP at end FY2009/10 to 136 percent at end
FY2011/12, including Fund credit. Consistent with these figures, the central government’s
primary surplus would rise from 6¼ percent of GDP in the current fiscal year to 7 percent in
FY2010/11 and 7¾ percent in FY2011/12. The deficit of the public bodies is projected to
decline from 3 percent of GDP to near balance in FY2011/12. Achieving these objectives
requires a combination of corrective revenue and spending measures, and specific actions to
reduce the interest bill. The government is committed to pass a FY2010/11 budget consistent
with the program outlined below and in the attached macro-framework tables. The government
believes that the measures outlined below will be sufficient to achieve these targets but is
committed to take additional action to meet the targets if needed.
Revenue and spending measures for the remainder of FY2009/10 and in FY 2010/11
 To safeguard public finances, the government has introduced three packages of
measures over the past year, aimed at boosting revenue by over 3 percent of GDP. In the
first phase of measures, introduced at the time of the FY 2009/10 budget, the government raised
the excise tax on gasoline by J$8.75 per litre, and broadened the General Consumption Tax base
by eliminating exemptions on several items. The second package, aimed at generating
annualized revenue equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP, became effective on October 1, 2009 and
included increasing the GCT rate on telephone services from 20 percent to 25 percent and
increasing the departure tax to J$1,800. The third package aimed at generating revenue
equivalent to 1¾ percent of GDP, became effective on January 1, 2010 (prior action). This
package includes the following measures:


General Consumption Tax (GCT) (yield: 0.5 percent of GDP). The GCT rate was
raised from 16½ percent to 17½ percent. In addition, residential electricity consumption
above 200 kwh and commercial/industrial electricity consumption are subject to GCT at
10 percent; the rate of GCT applicable to the tourism sector has been increased from 8.25
percent to 10 percent; and commercial importers are now required to pay a 5 percent
advanced GCT payment on all taxable imported goods.



Personal income tax. Tax rates for income over J$5 million but below J$10 million and
for income over J$10 million have been adjusted from 25 percent to 27.5 percent and 35
percent respectively, until March 31, 2011. The yield is estimated at 0.1 percent of GDP.



Fuel tax. An ad valorem fuel tax of 15 percent was applied. It is expected to generate
revenue equivalent to 0.9 percent of GDP on a full-year basis.

47



Other taxes. A freeze was introduced in the granting or renewal of discretionary waivers
of duties and taxes; excise taxes on cigarettes were raised; and license fees for large
motor cars were increased as were the common external tariff on various luxury items.
The yield is estimated at 0.3 percent of GDP.

 On the expenditure side, the freeze on wage and salary increases will be maintained
through FY2011/12, and primary spending in FY2010/11 will be reduced by 1¼ percent of
GDP, excluding the one-time costs associated with divesting Air Jamaica.


Wages and salaries. The government is committed to maintaining the current public
service wage freeze on salary increases into FY2011/12, while it develops a
comprehensive reform of the public sector. Wage and salary increases agreed for periods
prior to FY2009/10 that have not yet been paid will be paid in instalments over the
medium term. Similar treatment will also be applied in the event that an award is made to
health care workers in the reclassification case now under arbitration. Overall, this
scheduling across the medium term will help generate savings of close to 1 percent of
GDP in FY2010/11. New compensation agreements will be better aligned with the
budget process and budget constraints to ensure that the government’s objective of
reducing the size of the wage bill from 11¾ percent of GDP to about 9½ percent over the
next four years is achieved.



Cost containment in recurrent expenditure programmes. The budget for FY2010/11
will freeze or reduce allocations in a number of areas. Most notably, a nominal freeze
will be extended to purchases of goods and services, awards, and indemnities, and travel
costs will be cut by 10 percent. Allocations for public utility costs in ministries and
agencies will be reduced by at least 5 percent, benefiting from a recently-launched energy
saving programme. A nominal freeze will also be implemented on tuition subsidies for
tertiary education at the level of the FY2009/10 budget, while a system of means testing
will be introduced. Subsidies on external school examination fees will be reduced, by
improving the incentive structure (e.g. providing reimbursement based on results). These
measures will provide a combined fiscal saving of 0.5 percent of GDP.

 To help protect the poor, the social safety net will be significantly enhanced.
Resources within the social assistance envelope will be reallocated to the better targeted
programmes. Spending on these programmes will be increased by at least 25 percent in
FY2010/11 (0.3 percent of GDP). In particular, this increase will benefit the school feeding
programme, which provides breakfast and lunches to children; and the Programme of
Advancement through Health and Education (PATH), which provides conditional cash transfers
to five categories within the poorest income groups. Coverage of PATH will be expanded from
the current 327,000 to 360,000. A Steps to Work programme, aimed at improving the
employability of working age members of PATH households has been launched. The
government will also be pursuing efforts to expand the social safety net to assist persons below
the poverty line who do not qualify for PATH assistance.

48
 In the area of public bodies, which has been a constant drain on public resources,
significant improvement is to be achieved in the following key public bodies:


Air Jamaica will be divested or liquidated. The elimination of losses from Air Jamaica
is a key priority for the government. To that effect, the government is committed to
finalizing an agreement for the sale of the company to a strategic partner, or to arrange
the liquidation of the company. The arrangement will not entail subsidies or guarantees of
any kind to the airline or to the strategic partner. The costs associated with the divestment
of the airline, including for the cancellation of airplane lease agreements, fees to workers,
and tax payments due to foreign tax administration agencies will be addressed (prior
action).



The activities of Petrojam will remain streamlined. To avoid further increases in the
public debt due to the activities of public bodies, the government will not participate in
the planned Petrojam refinery expansion project. The cost of this project—estimated at
around 10 percent of GDP—is prohibitive in the current economic and fiscal context. The
government is exploring with the foreign shareholder the possibility of alternate means of
financing the project that will involve no Jamaica liability. In any case, no public sector
debt, directly contracted or guaranteed by any public sector institution, will be involved
in the financing of this project.



Divestment of the assets of Sugar Company of Jamaica will continue Already, two
factories have been sold, and the government is seeking to divest the remaining three
factories. In the interim, these factories will be either leased or put on a strict zero-deficit
budget by March 2010.



The net operational loss of the Jamaica Urban Transit Company (JUTC) will be
reduced by 40 percent. An increase of not less than 40 percent in bus fares approved by
the Office of Utility Regulations in October 2009 will be implemented effective April 1,
2010. Further improvements in the financial situation of this company will be achieved
from recent initiatives to curb illegal bus and taxi operators and continued improvements
in cost efficiency.

Public Debt Exchange
 The government will engage its creditors in a debt exchange aimed at securing
fiscal savings by exchanging existing high cost debt for new instruments that have lower
coupons and longer maturities. The success of the exchange is essential to closing the
government’s financing gap. It will also reduce the periodic bouts of financial market instability
arising from large rollover requirements and improve the structure of the debt to ensure
sustainability. The debt exchange will be undertaken in January 2010, in advance of the IMF’s
Board meeting to approve the requested SBA (prior action). Its key elements are as follows:

49


Objectives. The exchange explicitly targets achieving: (i) interest saving of at least
3 percent of GDP next fiscal year; and (ii) a reduction by at least two thirds in maturing
domestic debt over the next 36 months.



Bonds exchanged. The operation targets a high proportion of the government’s
domestically-issued bonds (J$701.4 billion, or 65 percent of GDP), with a special focus
on short-dated instruments (i.e., those maturing within the next two years) and highcoupon fixed-rate instruments. If necessary, the government intends to strategically
exercise call options embedded in existing bonds in support of the debt exchange.



New bonds. A mix of fixed and variable interest instruments, including inflation indexed
bonds will be offered in the exchange, with the aim of developing new benchmark
securities along the yield curve. The exchange is to be par-neutral. The lower interest rate
coupons will still provide investors positive real rates of return, based on improved
prospects for underlying inflation and exchange rate fundamentals.

 The debt exchange has been designed carefully, recognizing the need to avoid
jeopardizing the stability of the domestic financial system. Development of contingent
measures is an important aspect of this design. A contingency planning framework is in place
with the Financial Regulatory Council (FRC) taking the leadership role for ensuring appropriate
coordination and communications. FRC is an interagency policy level group, chaired by the
BOJ. Moreover, supervisors perform monthly stress tests (more frequently if circumstances
warrant), which allow them to identify and develop plans for institutions which might be
impacted under the various stress testing scenarios. Further, funds from the multilateral
institutions will be devoted to establishing a Financial Sector Support Fund (FSSF) in the
amount of approximately US$1 billion, immediately following disbursement under the IMF
programme. This fund will be established by the government and administered by the BOJ.
 Deposit taking institutions, securities dealers, and insurance companies will be
eligible for access to the FSSF provided the institution and the group to which the
institution belongs tender in the debt exchange at least 90 percent of eligible assets.
Institutions and groups must participate by first exchanging instruments that generate the
highest savings to the government (taking into account both coupon and maturity). The
government will authorize access to the FSSF, informed by the assessment and recommendation
of the FRC.
 The FSSF will be overseen by the FRC. The FRC will use the existing technical
working group (TWG), also chaired by BOJ staff, to assess applications from institutions
seeking financial assistance. Assessments will be made of the liquidity needs of the system and
the financial condition of the institution requesting support. The work of the TWG will be
ongoing, and it will provide periodic reports to the FRC. The FRC will monitor specific
thresholds, which will trigger further evaluation and action by the primary supervisor.

50
 The FSSF will be used primarily to provide temporary assistance to institutions in
the event of liquidity needs, including from external borrowing on margin. The
disbursement of funds will be secured by eligible collateral, which would be Government of
Jamaica (GOJ) instruments. Institutions should be required to repay liquidity support extended
under the FSSF as quickly as possible. After a period of 6 months, this liquidity should be
repaid or become subject to a punitive interest rate. We have developed a framework for
supervisory action based on the level of liquidity support provided as a percentage of capital. If
the stock of liquidity reaches certain levels, institutions will be subject to escalating supervisory
response including inspections, intensive monitoring, and intervention. The authorities will
consult with the Fund once 50 percent of the FSSF resources have been disbursed.
 All necessary measures will be taken to ensure stability of the financial system.
Institutions receiving support will be subject to intensive supervision. Any institution receiving
support for recapitalization will be required to submit an agreed plan of recapitalization and
operational restructuring, restrictions on dividend payments, and other measures as determined
by supervisors. For safety and soundness reasons, supervisors have the authority to intervene in
all institutions. This authority includes taking temporary management, which suspends the
rights of shareholders and managers for at least 60 days. The government maintains its
commitment to resolving any institution which does not meet the full solvency requirements, in
accordance with existing legal and regulatory frameworks and consistent with the objective of
maintaining financial system stability.
 Beyond the debt exchange, the government will strengthen its debt management
strategy. The strategy will include an explicit assessment of the cost-risk analysis of alternative
portfolio options, and enhance transparency and communication with market players and rating
agencies by June 2010. The government will also seek technical assistance from the IMF to
look into institutional features of the government securities market in order to make it more
competitive.
B.

Structural Fiscal Reforms

 The programme prioritizes a set of structural fiscal reforms that aim at
entrenching fiscal discipline and bolstering transparency. These reforms will help ensure
that the gains achieved during the programme period will be sustained and deepened over the
medium term.
Public Sector Reform
 The government is committed to rationalizing the public sector with a view to
improving efficiency and cost effectiveness. A committee appointed by the Prime Minister is
reviewing the existing structure of the public sector and will present recommendations by
September 2010 on the formulation of a new structure. The current structure is characterized by
many entities with unclear or overlapping functions. The government commits to implementing

51
the core recommendations of the committee no later than FY2011/12 and to gradually reduce
the wage bill from 11½ percent of GDP at present to around 9½ percent in the medium term. In
this context, the government believes that it is critical to increase its control over public sector
compensation and ensure that public employment costs are transparently reported. To achieve
these objectives the government will:


Complete a census of all government positions, compensation, and description of
function (by end-June 2010).



Create and maintain a comprehensive database of employment and compensation in the
public sector, updating on a regular basis the census information (by end-June 2010 and
thereafter).



Finalize and present the Prime Minister's Committee Report on Public Sector Reform (by
end-September 2010).



Complete a time-bound public employment reform action plan, which will be
implemented in time for the FY2011/12 budget (by end-December 2010) (structural
benchmark).

 The ongoing rationalization and reform of Jamaica’s public bodies will continue
over the medium term. This reform has been a priority of this administration since taking
office. The government’s three-pronged plan aims at: (i) divesting commercial entities;
(ii) merging entities when feasible to bolster efficiencies; and (iii) winding-up inactive entities.
Guiding the government’s approach are two fundamental principles: the priority given to
reducing public debt and the need to reduce the size of the public sector, particularly through
divesting activities that ought to be carried out more efficiently by the private sector. The
government has identified twenty parastatal entities to be divested. With respect to mergers and
the winding up of inactive entities, the government has also identified a wide set of candidates.
It is expected that a number of entities will be merged and more than 50 inactive enterprises will
be closed over the next 3 years. A plan to this effect will be completed in time to be
implemented beginning in the upcoming fiscal year. A Fiscal Responsibility Framework (see
below) will increase the entities' accountability by requiring approval of their budgets by
Parliament, while transparency will be increased through a stricter enforcement of reporting and
auditing standards. In order to ensure that sought after efficiency gains are realized, the
government plans to agree to performance targets with the management of each entity, in line
with the nature of each entity's core functions.
Tax Reform
 The government will deepen reforms to strengthen tax administration. In the short
term, this includes: (1) adopting a comprehensive reform strategy including a time bound action
plan to unify the domestic tax administration; (2) vesting the necessary legal and administrative
powers in the Tax Administration Director General instead of the respective commissioner of

52
each department; (3) expanding the large taxpayers office; (4) facilitating compliance through
streamlined procedures; and (5) developing an interface between the domestic tax and customs
IT systems to exchange information between departments. By June 2010, a time-bound action
plan will be designed to implement these reforms.
 Key tax policy reforms will also be undertaken. The government remains committed
to significantly scale back the system of tax incentives and exemptions in order to significantly
broaden the tax base, reduce distortions in the system, and allow a phased reduction in the
corporate tax rate to a more competitive level. The freeze in granting of discretionary waivers
on duties and taxes is the first step in this process. The government will prepare and announce
by September 2010 a strategy for the reform of tax incentives. At the same time, the
government is committed to spearheading the revival of negotiations on tax coordination under
the auspices of CARICOM.
Public Expenditure Management
 The government will enact legislation before the end of FY2009/10 to establish a
fiscal responsibility framework (FRF). The overall objective is to operationalize the key
principles of prudent fiscal management in order to ensure that the institutional framework is
consistent with achieving the government’s short- and medium-term fiscal targets. The FRF will
provide for clearly articulated fiscal policies, including a medium-term fiscal framework;
greater transparency through various reporting requirements; stricter accountability in the
management of public finances; and a better level of oversight of fiscal policy and the
management of public funds. The FRF will provide for improved public financial management
through expanding the coverage of the budget to all general government institutions; enshrining
the principle of no spending without prior budget appropriation; and requiring approval by
parliament of the budget of each of the “self financed” public bodies. By March 2010, the FRF
will be integrated into the Financial Administration and Audit Act, while the Public Bodies
Management and Accountability Act will also be amended to ensure consistency with the FRF
(structural benchmark).
 Central Treasury Management System. The government is pursuing the establishment
of a central treasury management system (CTMS) to bring responsibility for treasury
management functions under one agency. The CTMS will establish a Treasury Single Account
(TSA) to improve cash management. The government plans to consolidate all general
government cash resources in the TSA. All funds, including special funds, owned by general
government entities and held in financial institutions would be transferred to the TSA and those
accounts would then be closed. The government is receiving assistance in establishing the
CTMS from several multilateral agencies including the IMF. A step-by-step plan for
consolidation will be fully completed by end-June 2010 with the help of IMF technical
assistance (structural benchmark). This includes the preparation of an inventory of all accounts
of general government entities, sources of inflows, rules for outflows, and the existing balances.

53
The government is committed to have an operational CTMS system by end-December 2010 in
order to support the implementation of the FY2011/12 budget.
C.

Monetary and exchange rate policy

 Monetary policy will focus on reducing inflation and supporting the operations of
the domestic financial system. The BOJ will safeguard the programme’s inflation objective. In
the aftermath of the debt exchange, the BOJ will monitor closely operations in the financial
system to identify liquidity pressures.
 The BOJ will continue to manage monetary policy within the framework of a
managed floating exchange rate regime. The BOJ will allow the exchange rate to move freely
while using its instruments to ensure stability in credit and foreign exchange markets in the
short and medium term. To that end, the programme will contain clear reserve targets to
safeguard the adequacy of reserve coverage—a key policy priority in the current context.
D.

Strengthening the Financial System

 Important work needs to be undertaken to respond to the challenges posed by
Jamaica's highly interconnected financial institutions. Implementing recommendations made
during the 2006 IMF/World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) will introduce
a number of reforms by June 2011. The government plans to pass an omnibus banking law that
will allow for more effective supervision of financial conglomerates, including by harmonizing
the prudential standards that apply to commercial banks, merchant banks, and building
societies. Toward this end, the BOJ’s concept paper for an omnibus banking law and the related
legislative and regulatory framework to strengthen the oversight of the financial sector (as
identified in the 2006 FSAP),will be reviewed and revised, in consultation with IMF (structural
benchmark). The Bank of Jamaica Act and the Financial Services Commission Act will both be
amended to further strengthen supervisory tools. Stronger capital adequacy standards will be
developed for all financial institutions to achieve fullest compliance with international
standards, in consultation with the Fund. Additionally, supervisors will adopt rules which
require them to take remedial measures against a weak entity within specific timeframes
(prompt corrective action) (December 2010).
 The Bank of Jamaica Act will also be amended to establish the legal framework to
underpin its responsibility for overall financial system stability by December 2010. This
will allow the BOJ to access data from parent or affiliate institutions that might not be a part of
a conglomerate group. It will also provide a stronger basis for the BOJ to provide financial
support to nonbanks, if needed for securing financial system stability during periods of extreme
volatility. The BOJ will develop procedures for providing liquidity facilities to primary dealers.
 There are several additional reforms pertaining specifically to deposit-taking
institutions that will be developed, in consultation with the Fund. Other key reforms will
deal with enhancing capital rules to address all market risks (December 2010), including equity

54
and interest rate risks; improving the frameworks for AML/CFT (March 2010); and combating
unregulated financial organizations by June 2010 (structural benchmark).
 The government will reform the securities dealer sector to strengthen its ability to
withstand shocks going forward. A major problem with the securities dealer sector as
currently structured is that liquidity and maturity risk are held on the security dealer’s balance
sheet and capital requirements are not comprehensive, as identified in the FSAP. In keeping
with FSAP recommendations and technical assistance from CARTAC, the government is taking
steps to shift risks to investors by encouraging the development of collective investment
schemes, including by amending the Unit Trust Act. Amendments to this act will come into
effect by December 2010. Thereafter, the existing freeze on new registrations of unit trusts (and
new unit trust products) will be lifted. At the same time, the government is committed to
removing structural impediments to the development of a vibrant local mutual fund market,
including by exempting mutual funds from onerous provisions in the Companies Act of Jamaica
by December 2010.
 In addition, the government will continue strengthening the regulatory and
supervisory framework of the securities dealers sector. Reforms to enhance capitalization
and margin requirements, to include a liquidity risk component and an operational risk
component will be developed in consultation with the Fund. It is expected that draft regulations
will be ready by August 2010, to be fully implemented by March 2012. Until that time, we will
place a temporary freeze on issuing new licenses for securities dealers whose business model is
based on repos and other short-term liabilities, except coming out of mergers and/or acquisitions
of existing firms (structural benchmark). The government is committed to ensuring that any new
applicants have robust financial resources, a well-diversified business model and
knowledgeable management and staff. The government will also press ahead with an initiative
underway to improve the stress testing and contingency planning capacity of the Financial
Services Commission (FSC). Draft legislation will be presented to Parliament for approval in
early FY2011/12 to close gaps in the power of the FSC to conduct consolidated supervision, in
line with the BOJ's omnibus banking bill. Dealers’ repo contracts are a source of risk. Dealers
will be required to register customer interest against underlying instruments in a central
securities depository by September 2010. To ensure that the enhanced legal framework is
technically sound and the agreed timetable in the program is met, the FSC would require IMF
technical assistance to develop the new risk-based capital framework to incorporate elements
such as operational risk and liquidity risk.
V.

FINANCING UNDER THE PROGRAMME

 In support of the economic programme, the government envisages the need for
financing from multilateral sources of US$2.4 billion over the next two years. Of this, about
half would be required upfront to address immediate budget financing and balance of payments
needs as well as the establishment of the FSSF. Total funding from the IMF is expected to be
SDR 820.5 million or 300 percent of quota (about US$1,300 million), with about half provided

55
up front. Loan commitments over the next two years from the IDB, World Bank, and the
Caribbean Development Bank are US$1.1 billion. In addition, Jamaica will continue to draw
financing from the PetroCaribe facility and to strategically access external commercial markets,
which are expected to re-open before the end of the next fiscal year. Remaining financing needs
will be filled through domestic financial sector borrowing.
VI. SAFEGUARDS ASSESSMENT
 The government fully recognizes the importance of completing a safeguards
assessment of BOJ before the first review of the Stand-By Arrangement. To facilitate such
an assessment, the central bank’s external auditors have been authorized to hold discussions
directly with Fund staff. An IMF mission to conduct the safeguards assessment is scheduled for
February 2010 and the BOJ will provide Fund staff with all necessary information in
preparation of that mission.
VII. PROGRAMME MONITORING
 The programme will be monitored on a quarterly basis, through quantitative
performance criteria, indicative targets, and structural benchmarks. The phasing of access
under the arrangement and the review schedule are set out in Table 1 of this memorandum. The
quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets through end-March 2011 are set out in
Table 2. Targets for the remainder of FY2010/11 will be identified at the time of the second
programme review. Programme reviews will assess the achievement of the quantitative targets
and focus on progress in key structural reforms. In this context, the first programme review will
focus on the FY 2010/11 budget and the implementation of the fiscal responsibility framework.
The review will also examine the plans for recapitalizing financial institutions. The second
review will focus on fiscal reforms, specifically in the debt management, tax, and public
financial management areas. It will also review progress in the various initiatives aimed at
strengthening financial system regulatory and supervisory framework. The third review will
focus on public bodies and employment reforms as well as progress in financial sector reforms.
Structural benchmarks are set out in Table 3. Programme conditionality is further specified in
the accompanying Technical Memorandum of Understanding.

Table 1. Jamaica: Schedule of reviews and Purchases

Date

Total

414.3
63.7
31.9
31.9
127.5
31.9
31.9
31.9
55.5

151.5
23.3
11.7
11.7
46.6
11.7
11.7
11.7
20.3

820.5

300.0

Conditions
Approval of arrangement
First review and end-March 2010 performance criteria
Second review and end-June 2010 performance criteria
Third review and end-September 2010 performance criteria
Fourth review and end-December 2010 performance criteria
Fifth review and end-March 2011 performance criteria
Sixth review and end-June 2011 performance criteria
Seventh review and end-September 2011 performance criteria
Eighth review and end-December 2011 performance criteria

56

February 4, 2010
May 31, 2010
August 31, 2010
November 30, 2010
February 28, 2011
May 31, 2011
August 31, 2011
November 30, 2011
February 28, 2012

Amount of Purchase
Millions of SDR
Percent of Quota

Table 2: Jamaica: Quantitative Performance Criteria 1/
2010
2011
end Mar. 6/ end Jun.
end Sept. end Dec. end Mar.
Performance criteria
Indicative targets
Fiscal targets
66.9

12.1

31.5

51.7

83.3

-29.6

-3.0

-6.0

-8.9

-11.9

1260.4

1287.2

1306.6

1325.2

1332.4

32.8

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

5. Central government accumulation of domestic arrears (ceiling) 5/

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

6. Central government accumulation of tax arrears (ceiling) 7/

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

7. Consolidated government accumulation of external arrears (ceiling) /8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

8. Cumulative change in net international reserves (floor) 8/

-351

-534

-673

-617

-651

9. Net domestic assets (ceiling)

-49.1

-33.7

-20.6

-11.2

-18.5

1. Primary balance of the central administration (floor) 2/ 3/
2. Overall balance of public entities (floor) 2/ 3/
3. Central government direct debt (ceiling) 3/
4. Cumulative net increase in central government guaranteed debt (ceiling) 2/ 4/

Monetary targets

57

1/ Targets as defined in the Technical memorandum of Understanding.
2/ Cumulative flows through April 1 to March 31.
3/ Excludes government guaranteed debt. In billions of Jamaican dollars. The central government direct debt excludes IMF credits.
4/ In billions of Jamaican dollars.
5/ Includes debt payments, supplies and other committed spending as per contractual obligations.
6/ Includes February and March 2010, under the assumption that the program begins on February 1, 2010.
7/ Includes all arrears in refunding taxpayers owed refunds stipulated by law.
8/ In millions of US dollars.

Table 3: Jamaica: Programme Conditionality
Measure

Conditionality

Timing

Prior Actions
Government Finances
1

Adopt a tax policy package yielding around 2 percent of GDP (MEFP, paragraph 10).

Public debt management
Launch and complete debt exchange operation that, in comparison to the existing securities, achieves an
2 estimated saving of over 3 percent of GDP in FY2010/11 and a reduction in the amount of debt maturing during
2010-2012 by at least two thirds. (MEFP, paragraph 14).

Prior action

December 2009

Prior action

January 2010

Prior action

January 2010

Benchmark

June 2010

Public entities
3

Reach agreement on divestment of Air Jamaica or initiate plans to liquidate the airline by June 2010 (MEFP,
paragraph 13).
Structural Benchmarks

5

Pass a fiscal responsibility framework and accompanying legislative amendments (MEFP, paragraph 26).

Benchmark

March 2010

6

Design a public employment and compensation reform (MEFP, paragraph 22).

Benchmark

December 2010

Benchmark

March 2010

Benchmark

June 2010

Benchmark

February 2010

Financial sector reform
7

8
9

Review and revise, in consultation with IMF, the BOJ’s concept paper for an omnibus banking law and the
related legislative and regulatory framework to strengthen the oversight of the financial sector (as identified in
the 2006 FSAP), (MEFP, paragraph 30).
Draft a concept paper, in consultation with the IMF, on all major elements to be included in legislation and other
measures to address unregulated financial organizations (MEFP, paragraph 32).
Introduce a temporary freeze on issuing new licenses for securities dealers whose business model is based on
repos and other short-term liabilities (MEFP, paragraph 34).

58

Institutional Fiscal Reform
Complete a time-bound plan to establish a central treasury management system by end-2010 (MEFP,
4 paragraph 27).

59
JAMAICA––TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
This Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) defines the variables subject to
quantitative targets (performance criteria and indicative targets), specified in the Letter of Intent
(LOI). It also describes the methods to be used in assessing the program performance and the
information requirements to ensure adequate monitoring of the targets. As is standard under all
Fund arrangements, we will consult with the Fund before modifying measures contained in this
letter, or adopting new measures that would deviate from the goals of the program, and provide
the Fund with the necessary information for program monitoring.
The exchange rates for the purposes of the program of the Jamaican dollar (J$) to the U.S. dollar
is set at J$89.35 = US$1, to the Special Drawing Right (SDR) at J$140.18=SDR 1, to the euro at
J$127.57 = €1, to the Canadian dollar at J$81.40 = CND$1, and to the British pound at
J$143.11 =£1.
VIII. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA: DEFINITION OF VARIABLES
A.

Cumulative Floor of the Central Government Primary Balance

Definition: The central government for the purposes of the program consists of the set of
institutions currently covered under the state budget. The fiscal year starts on April 1 in each
calendar year and it ends on March 31 of the following year.
The primary balance of the central government is defined as total revenues minus primary
expenditure and covers non-interest government activities as specified in the budget. The central
government includes public bodies that are financed through the Consolidated Fund. Data will be
provided to the Fund with a lag of no more than three weeks after the test date.
Revenues are recorded when the funds are transferred to a government revenue account.
Revenues will also include grants. Capital revenues will not include any revenues from asset
sales as proceeding from divestment operations. Central government primary expenditure is
recorded on a cash basis, and includes compensation payments, other recurrent expenditures, and
capital spending (Table 2). Primary expenditure also includes transfers to other public bodies
which are not self-financed. Costs associated with divestment operations or liquidation of public
entities, such as cancellation of existing contracts or severance payments to workers will be
allocated to current and capital expenditures, accordingly.
The primary balance target does not include expenditure related to the divestment or liquidation
costs of Air Jamaica. Should costs associated to the divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica
occur, the targets will be adjusted downwards to accommodate those costs, up to an amount
equivalent to US$200 million at the program reference exchange rate.

60
1. Targets on the Primary Balance of the Central Government
Cumulative over the fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Floor
(In billions of J$)
End-January 2010 (program projection)
End-February 2010 (program projection)
End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

45.4
47.0
66.9

End-April 2010 (program projection)
End-May 2010 (progam projection)
End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

6.3
14.8
12.1

End-July 2010 (program projection)
End-August 2010 (program projection)
End-September 2010 (indicative target)

18.2
22.3
31.5

End-October 2010 (program projection)
End-November 2010 (program projection)
End-December 2010 (indicative target)

35.6
40.8
51.7

End-January 2011 (program projection)
End-February 2011 (program projection)
End-March 2011 (indicative target)

61.2
63.9
83.3

B.

Cumulative Floor on Overall Balance of Public Bodies

Definition: Public bodies consist of all self-financed public bodies, including the 20 “Selected
Public Bodies”, and “Other Public Bodies”. The 20 “Selected Public Bodies” include: Airport
Authority of Jamaica (AAJ); Human Employment and Resource Training Trust (HEART);
Jamaica Mortgage Bank (JMB); House Agency of Jamaica (HAJ); National Housing Trust
(NHT); National Insurance Fund (NIF); Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ); National Water
Commission (NWC); Petrojam; Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ); Ports Authority of
Jamaica (PAJ); Urban Development Corporation (UDC); Jamaica Urban Transit Company Ltd.
(JUTC); Caymanas Track Ltd. (CTL); Wallenford Coffee Company Ltd. (WCC); National Road
Operating and Constructing Company Ltd. (NROCC); Petro-Ethanol; Air Jamaica (AJ);
Clarendon Aluminum Partners (CAP); Sugar Company of Jamaica (SCJ). “Other Public Bodies”
include: Bauxite and Alumina Trading Company of Jamaica Ltd. ; Jamaica Bauxite Mining Ltd. ;
Petroleum Company of Jamaica Ltd. (Petcom); Wigton Windfarm Ltd.; Broadcasting
Commission of Jamaica; The Office of Utilities Regulation; Spectrum Management Authority;
Sports Development Foundation; Bureau of Standards Jamaica; Factories Corporation of Jamaica
Ltd.; Kingston Freezone Company Ltd.; Micro Investment Development Agency Ltd.; Montego
Bay Freezone Company Ltd.; Postal Corporation of Jamaica Ltd.; Self Start Fund; Betting
Gaming and Lotteries Commission; Culture, Health, Arts, Sports and Education Fund; Financial
Services Commission; Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation, Jamaica Racing Commission,
National Export-Import Bank of Jamaica Ltd.; PetroCaribe Development Fund; The Public
Accountancy Board; Students’ Loan Bureau; National Health Fund; Agricultural Development
Corporation; Agricultural Marketing Corporation, Cocoa Industry Board; Coffee Industry Board;
Sugar Industry Authority; Overseas Examination Commission; Aeronautical

61
Telecommunications Ltd.; Jamaica Civil Aviation Authority; Jamaica Ultimate Tire Company
Ltd.; Jamaica Railway Corporation Ltd.; Ports Security Corps Ltd.; Transport Authority.
The overall balance of public bodies will be calculated from the Statement A’s provided by the
Public Enterprises Division of the Ministry of Finance and the Public Services (MoFPS) for each
of the selected public bodies and the group of the other public bodies as defined above. The
definition of overall balance used is operational balance, plus capital account net of revenues
(investment returns, minus capital expenditure, plus change in inventories), minus dividends and
corporate taxes transferred to government, plus net other transfers from government. For the
particular case of the National Housing Trust, capital account revenues will not be netted out
since they do not refer to flows arising from assets sales but rather to contribution revenue, and
therefore will be included among recurrent revenue such as is done for pension funds. Data will
be provided to the Fund with a lag of no more than 6 weeks after the test date.
The definitions of “Selected Public Bodies” and “Other Public Bodies” will be adjusted as the
process of public bodies’ rationalization, including divestments and mergers, advances. All new
entities that might be created as a result of this process, including from the merging of existing
entities, will be incorporated in either of these two groups. However, this process will not affect
the performance criterion.

62
2. Targets on the Overall Fiscal Balance of the Public Bodies
Cumulative Balance over the fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Floor
(In billions of J$)
End-January 2010 (program projection)
End-February 2010 (program projection)
End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

-24.7
-27.2
-29.6

End-April 2010 (program projection)
End-May 2010 (progam projection)
End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

-1.0
-2.0
-3.0

End-July 2010 (program projection)
End-August 2010 (program projection)
End-September 2010 (indicative target)

-4.0
-5.0
-6.0

End-October 2010 (program projection)
End-November 2010 (program projection)
End-December 2010 (indicative target)

-7.0
-8.0
-8.9

End-January 2011 (program projection)
End-February 2011 (program projection)
End-March 2011 (indicative target)

C.

-9.9
-10.9
-11.9

Ceiling on the Stock of Central Government Direct Debt

Definition: Central government direct debt includes all domestic and external bonds and any
other form of central government debt, such as supplier loans. It excludes IMF debt.
The target will be set in Jamaican dollars. The change in the stock of debt will be measured
“below the line” as all debt issuance minus repayments on all central government debt. Data will
be provided to the Fund with a lag of no more than four weeks after the test date. The target will
be adjusted upwards if explicit government guarantees (defined as the stock of existing
guarantees as at end March 2010 plus new guarantees allowed to be issued under the program)
are called.

63
3. Targets on Central Government Direct Debt Stock
Cumulative balance over the fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Ceiling
(In billions of J$)

D.

End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

1260

End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

1287

End-September 2010 (indicative target)

1307

End-December 2010 (indicative target)

1325

End-March 2011 (indicative target)

1332

Ceiling on Net Increase in Central Government Guaranteed Debt

Definition: Net increase in central government guaranteed debt is calculated as issuance minus
repayments of central government guaranteed debt, in billions of Jamaican dollars, including
domestic and external bonds, loans and all other types of debt. The cumulative targets are
computed as the difference between the stock of government guaranteed debt as of end-March of
each year and the stock of government guaranteed debt as of the target date, as specified in table
4. The cumulative net increase in central government guaranteed debt will be monitored on a
continuous basis. Data will be provided to the Fund with a lag of no more than four weeks after
the test date. In the case where the central government debt guarantees are called, the stock of
central government guaranteed debt will be adjusted downwards to preserve the performance
criteria defined in table 4.
4. Cumulative Net Increase in Central Government
Guaranteed Debt Stock
Cumulative balance over the fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Ceiling
(In billions of J$)
Stock of Government Guaranteed Debt at end-March 2009
Stock of Government Guaranteed Debt at end-March 2010

76.3
109.1

End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

32.8

End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

3.0

End-September 2010 (indicative target)

3.0

End-December 2010 (indicative target)

3.0

End-March 2011 (indicative target)

3.0

64
E.

Ceiling on Central Government Accumulation of Domestic Arrears

Definition: Domestic arrears are defined as payments to residents determined by contractual
obligations that remain unpaid 90 days after the due date. Central government domestic arrears
include arrears on domestic central government direct debt, including to suppliers, and all
recurrent and capital expenditure commitments. The ceiling on central government accumulation
of domestic arrears will be monitored on a continuous basis. Data will be provided to the Fund
with a lag of no more than four weeks after the test date.
5. Central Government Accumulation of Domestic Arrears
Cumulative Balance over the Fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Ceiling
(In millions of J$)

F.

End-January 2010 (program projection)
End-February 2010 (program projection)
End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-April 2010 (program projection)
End-May 2010 (progam projection)
End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-July 2010 (program projection)
End-August 2010 (program projection)
End-September 2010 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-October 2010 (program projection)
End-November 2010 (program projection)
End-December 2010 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-January 2011 (program projection)
End-February 2011 (program projection)
End-March 2011 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

Ceiling on Central Government Accumulation of tax refund arrears

Definition: Tax refund arrears are defined as obligations on tax refunds in accordance with tax
legislation that remain unpaid 90 days after the due date. The central government accumulation
of tax refund arrears will be monitored on a continuous basis. Data will be provided to the Fund
with a lag of no more than three weeks after the test date.

65
6. Central Government Accumulation of Tax Arrears
Cumulative Balance over the Fiscal year (April 1 to March 31)
Ceiling
(In millions of J$)
End-January 2010 (program projection)
End-February 2010 (program projection)
End-March 2010 (performance criterion)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-April 2010 (program projection)
End-May 2010 (progam projection)
End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-July 2010 (program projection)
End-August 2010 (program projection)
End-September 2010 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-October 2010 (program projection)
End-November 2010 (program projection)
End-December 2010 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

End-January 2011 (program projection)
End-February 2011 (program projection)
End-March 2011 (indicative target)

0.0
0.0
0.0

G.

Floor on Accumulation of BOJ Net International Reserves

Definition: Net international reserves (NIR) of the BOJ are defined as the US dollar value of
gross foreign assets of the BOJ minus gross foreign liabilities with maturity of less than one year.
Non-US dollar denominated foreign assets and liabilities will be converted into US dollar at the
program exchange rates. Data will be provided by the BOJ to the Fund with a lag of no more
than five days past the test date.
Gross foreign assets are defined consistently with the Sixth Edition of the Balance of Payments
Manual and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6) as readily available claims on
nonresidents denominated in foreign convertible currencies. They include the BOJ’s holdings of
monetary gold, SDR holdings, foreign currency cash, foreign currency securities, liquid balances
abroad, and the country’s reserve position at the Fund. Excluded from reserve assets are any
assets that are pledged, collateralized, or otherwise encumbered, claims on residents, claims in
foreign exchange arising from derivatives in foreign currency vis-à-vis domestic currency (such
as futures, forwards, swaps, and options), precious metals other than gold, assets in
nonconvertible currencies, and illiquid assets.
Gross foreign liabilities are defined consistently with the definition of NIR for program purposes
and include all foreign exchange liabilities to nonresidents, including commitments to sell
foreign exchange arising from derivatives (such as futures, forwards, swaps, and options), and all
credit outstanding from the Fund.

66
NIR targets will also be adjusted upward (downward) by the surplus (shortfall) in program
disbursements relative to the baseline projection reported in Table 8. Program disbursements are
defined as external disbursements from official creditors that are usable for the financing of the
consolidated government.
If the amount of cumulative changes from end-December 2009 in BOJ’s foreign exchange
liabilities to residents and banks’ foreign currency deposits in BOJ against reserve requirements
is higher (lower) than the baseline projection reported in Table 9, the NIR targets will be
adjusted upward (downward) by the cumulative difference in these items.
Should costs associated to the divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica occur, the targets will be
adjusted downwards to accommodate those costs, up to an amount equivalent to US$140 million
at the program reference exchange rate.
7. Net International Reserves of the Bank of Jamaica
(In millions of US$)
6. Floor on the Net International Reserves of the Bank of Jamaica
Outstanding stock
End-December 2009

1,729

Floor on cumulative change in net international reserves from end-December 2009:
End March 2010 (performance criterion)

-351

End-June 2010 (performance criterion)

-534

End-September 2010 (indicative target)

-673

End-December 2010 (indicative target)

-617

End-March 2011 (indicative target)

-651

8. External Program Disbursements (baseline projection)
Cumulative flows from end-December 2009

(In millions of US$)

End March 2010

685

End-June 2010

685

End-September 2010

785

End-December 2010

1,070

End-March 2011

1,070

67
Table 9. Reserve liabilities items for NIR target purposes
(In millions of US$) 1/
1. BOJ's foreign liabilities to residents
Outstanding stock
End-December 2009

199.1

Cumulative change from end-December 2009
End-March 2010
End-June 2010
End-September 2010
End-December 2010
End-March 2011

-122.3
-199.1
-199.1
-199.1
-199.1

2. Banks foreign currency deposits in BOJ against reserve requirements
Outstanding stock
End-December 2009

194.6

Cumulative change from end-December 2009
End-March 2010
End-June 2010
End-September 2010
End-December 2010
End-March 2011
1/ Converted at the programme exchange rates.

H.

11.4
5.5
10.2
9.8
9.2

Ceiling on Net Domestic Assets of the Bank of Jamaica

Definition: The Bank of Jamaica net domestic assets (NDA) are defined as the difference
between the monetary base and NIR. The monetary base includes currency in the hands of the
non-bank public plus vault cash held in the banking system, statutory cash reserve requirements
against prescribed liabilities in Jamaica Dollars held by commercial banks at the Bank of
Jamaica, and the current account of commercial banks comprising of credit balances held at the
central bank. Data will be provided to the Fund with a lag of no more than three weeks after the
test date.
Table 10. Ceilings on Net Domestic Assets of the Bank of Jamaica
(In billions of J$)
Ceiling on net domestic assets:
End March 2010 (performance criterion)
End-June 2010 (performance criterion)
End-September 2010 (indicative target)
End-December 2010 (indicative target)
End-March 2011 (indicative target)

-49.1
-33.7
-20.6
-11.2
-18.5

68

IX. CONTINUOUS PERFORMANCE CRITERION ON NON-ACCUMULATION OF EXTERNAL DEBT
PAYMENTS ARREARS
Definition: consolidated government includes the central government and the public bodies, as
defined in sections A and B, respectively.
Definition: external debt is determined according to the residency criterion.
Definition: the term “debt” will be understood to mean a current, i.e., not contingent, liability,
created under a contractual arrangement through the provision of value in the form of assets
(including currency) or services, and which requires the obligor to make one or more payments
in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future point(s) in time; these
payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities incurred under the contract. Debts
can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as follows:
i. Loans, i.e., advances of money to the obligor by the lender made on the basis of an
undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the future (including deposits, bonds,
debentures, commercial loans and buyers’ credits) and temporary exchanges of assets that
are equivalent to fully collateralized loans under which the obligor is required to repay
the funds, and usually pay interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the
future (such as repurchase agreements and official swap arrangements);
ii. Suppliers’ credits, i.e., contracts where the supplier permits the obligor to defer payments
until some time after the date on which the goods are delivered or services are provided;
and
iii. Leases, i.e., arrangements under which property is provided which the lessee has the right
to use for one or more specified period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total
expected service life of the property. For the purpose of the program, the debt is the
present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments expected to be made
during the period of the agreement excluding those payments that cover the operation,
repair or maintenance of the property.
Definition: under the definition of debt set out above, arrears, penalties, and judicially awarded
damages arising from the failure to make payment under a contractual obligation that constitutes
debt are debt. Failure to make payment on an obligation that is not considered debt under this
definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will not give rise to debt.
The consolidated government and the BOJ will accumulate no external debt payment arrears
during the program period. For the purpose of this performance criterion, an external debt
payment arrear will be defined as a payment by the consolidated government and the BOJ, which
has not been made within seven days after falling due.

69
The stock of external arrears of the consolidated government and the BOJ will be calculated
based on the schedule of external payments obligations reported by the MoFPS. Data on external
arrears will be reconciled with the relevant creditors, and any necessary adjustments will be
incorporated in these targets as they occur.
The performance criterion will apply on a continuous basis. The MoFPS will provide the final
data on the stock of external arrears of the consolidated government and the BOJ to the Fund,
with a lag of not more than two weeks after the test date. This performance criterion does not
cover arrears on trade credits.
X. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
To ensure adequate monitoring of economic variables and reforms, the authorities will provide
the following information:
A.

Daily



Net international reserves; nominal exchange rates; interest rates on BOJ repurchase
agreements; total currency issued by the BOJ, deposits held by financial institutions at the
BOJ; required and excess reserves of the banking sector in local and foreign currency,
total liquidity assistance to banks through normal BOJ operations, including overdrafts;
overnight interest rates; GOJ bond yields.



Disbursements from the Financial System Support Fund, by institutions.



Deposits and liquidity assistance to institutions, by institution.



Bank of Jamaica purchases and sales of foreign currency.



Amounts offered, demanded and placed in Bank of Jamaica open market operations,
including rates on offer for each tenor.



Amounts offered, demanded and placed in Government of Jamaica auctions; including
minimum maximum and average bid rates.
B.

Weekly



Consolidated balance sheet and individual balance sheets of the core securities dealers,
including indicators of liquidity and capital positions; evolution of liabilities, details on
sources of funding, including from external borrowing on margin.



Deposits in the banking system and total currency in circulation.

C.

70
Monthly



Central government operations, with a lag of no more than three weeks after the closing of
each month.



Public entities’ Statement A: consolidated and by institution for the “Selected Public Bodies”,
and consolidated for the “Other Public Bodies” with a lag of no more than six weeks after the
closing of each month.



Central government debt amortization and repayments, by instrument (LRS, Debentures, US$
denominated bonds, US$-linked bonds, treasury bills, Eurobonds, domestic loans, external
commercial loans; external official loans). Includes government direct, government
guaranteed, and total. In the case of issuance of government guaranteed debt, include the
name of the guaranteed individual/institution. The reporting lag should not exceed four weeks
after the closing of each month.



Central government debt stock, including by (i) creditor (official, commercial domestic,
commercial external; (ii) instrument (LRS, Debentures, US$ denominated bonds, US$-linked
bonds, treasury bills, Eurobonds, domestic loans, external commercial loans; external official
loans); (iii) direct and guaranteed. The reporting lag should not exceed four weeks after the
closing of each month.



Holdings of domestic bonds (LRS, Debentures, US$-linked, US$-denominated) by holder
category. The reporting lag should not exceed four weeks after the closing of each month.



Legal measures that affect the revenue of the central government (tax rates, import tariffs,
exemptions, etc.).



Balance sheet of the Bank of Jamaica.



A summary of monetary accounts providing detailed information on the accounts of the Bank
of Jamaica, commercial banks, and the overall banking system. Include a detailed
decomposition on Bank of Jamaica and commercial bank net claims on the Central
Government, selected public bodies, and other public bodies.10 This information should be
received with a lag of no more than three weeks after the closing of each month.



Profits of the Bank of Jamaica on a cash and accrual basis, including a detailed decomposition
of cash profits and profits from foreign exchange operations.



Deposits in the banking system: current accounts, savings and time deposits. Average
monthly interest rates on loans and deposits.

10

Selected public bodies and other public bodies are defined as outlined in Section B.

71



Financial statements of other (non-bank) deposit taking institutions, insurance companies and
pension funds.



Monthly balance sheet and income statement data of deposit taking institutions, as reported to
the BOJ



Data on Table 9.



A full set of monthly FSIs regularly calculated by the BOJ, including capital adequacy,
profitability and liquidity ratios.



Imports and exports of goods, in US$ million. Tourism indicators. Remittances’ flows.



Consumer price inflation, including by sub-components of the CPI index.



Use of the PetroCaribe fund, including loan portfolio by debtor and allocation of the liquidity
funds in reserve.
D.

Quarterly



Summary balance of payments. Revised outturn for the preceding quarters and quarterly
projections for the forthcoming year, with a lag of no more than one month following the
close of the quarter.



Stock of external debt, by creditor, as of end-of-quarter, with a lag of no more than one month
following the close of the quarter. The reporting lag should not exceed four weeks after the
closing of each month.



Gross domestic product growth by sector, in real and nominal terms, including revised
outturn for the preceding quarters and projections for the next four quarters.



BOJ Quarterly Financial Stability Report.

72

Table 1. Jamaica: Selected Economic Indicators 1/
Proj.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/122012/132013/14

GDP, prices, and employment
Real GDP
Nominal GDP
Consumer price index (end of period)
Consumer price index (average)
Exchange rate (end of period, in J$/US$)
Exchange rate (average, J$/US$)
End-of-period REER (percent change, apprecia
Unemployment rate (in percent)

1.2
12.2
11.2
14.8
65.3
63.2
4.0
11.6

3.2
14.2
8.0
7.4
67.6
66.3
-0.7
10.8

0.6
13.2
19.9
12.4
70.8
69.7
4.0
9.7

-1.6
12.3
12.4
20.2
88.0
76.3
-10.1
10.6

-3.5
3.3
12.2
9.0
…
…
…
…

0.6
11.5
7.3
11.2
…
…
…
…

1.9
10.3
7.0
7.1
…
…
…
…

1.9
9.7
6.5
6.7
…
…
…
…

2.0
9.5
6.0
6.3
…
…
…
…

Government operations
Budgetary revenue
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Interest payments 2/

26.2
29.5
16.3
13.2

25.9
30.8
18.9
11.9

27.3
31.1
19.5
11.6

26.6
34.0
21.8
12.2

28.3
38.2
22.0
16.2

27.7
34.2
20.7
13.5

27.8
32.1
20.2
11.9

27.9
30.5
19.5
10.9

27.9
28.6
18.8
9.7

Budget balance
Of which: primary fiscal balance
Of which: underlying primary fiscal balance 3/

-3.3
9.9
..

-4.8
7.0
..

-3.8
7.8
..

-7.3
4.8
..

-10.0
6.2
5.2

-6.5
7.0
7.0

-4.3
7.7
7.7

-2.6
8.3
8.3

-0.7
9.1
9.1

Off-budget expenditure 4/

1.0

1.5

1.1

-0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Net capital transfers to public entities 5/ 6/

..

..

0.0

0.6

-0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Public entities balance 5/
of which financed with loans and deposits dra

..
..

..
..

-3.4
-3.4

-2.5
-3.1

-2.8
-2.5

-1.0
-1.0

-0.6
-0.6

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

-8.2

-9.4

-12.7

-7.5

-4.9

-2.5

-0.5

Overall fiscal balance
Public debt 2/ 7/

119.9

116.5

113.5

124.0

140.0

140.0

External sector
Current account balance
Of which: exports of goods, f.o.b.
Of which: imports of goods, f.o.b.

-10.5
16.0
40.0

-9.7
17.9
42.3

-18.4
18.3
50.4

-18.0
17.0
50.0

-9.4
11.8
38.9

-8.8
12.0
39.0

Net international reserves (in millions of US$)
2,078
Gross international reserves (In millions of US$ 2,373

2,329
2,614

2,083
2,106

1,629
1,664

1,378
2,051

1,078
2,151

1.7
6.9
-5.6
8.6

4.2
6.6
-3.5
10.8

0.9
11.6
2.7
12.5

-13.3
24.8
8.7
11.6

-6.1
5.2
5.1
-1.0

-7.7
19.2
2.2
11.5

7.6
6.0
2.7
13.7

4.0
9.1
1.7
13.1

8.1
1.4
0.8
9.5

3.1

3.2

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.4

3.3

3.2

3.2

714

815

923

1,037

1,071

1,194

Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which: credit to the central government
Broad money
Velocity (ratio of GDP to broad money)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of J$)

135.6 126.1 114.9

-6.6
12.6
39.5

-5.9
12.9
39.0

-5.0
13.2
38.4

1,325 1,436 1,705
2,635 2,677 2,616

1,317 1,445 1,582

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based partly on assumptions provided by the authorities. Fiscal years run from April 1 to March 31. Authorities'
budgets presented according to IMF definitions.
2/ Assumes liability management operations on January 1st 2010 involving the par-for-par exchange of bonds,
and targeting a 12.5 percent yield return on domestically-issued bonds and extension of maturities.
3/ Adjusts for one-off revenues in FY 2009/10.
4/ Includes debt issued to BOJ to cover its cash losses and, until 2007/08, debt related to off-budget projects financed
initially by the private sector.
5/ Assumes that any expansion of the PetroJam refinery, costing about 10 percent of GDP in cumulative terms, does not
involve government financing, neither direct nor guaranteed.
6/ Includes 20 selected public entities under rationalization or divestment plans and other public entities.
7/ Central government direct and guaranteed only, including PetroCaribe debt and proposed IMF disbursements.

73

Table 2. Jamaica: Summary of Central Government Operations
(in billions of Jamaican dollars)
Proj.

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

Budgetary revenue and grants
Tax
Non-tax
Grants
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Wage and salaries
Other expenditure
Capital expenditure 1/
Interest
Domestic
Current
BoJ special issue bonds 2/
External

186.7
165.7
20.3
0.7
210.4
116.0
63.1
40.8
12.0
94.4
71.5
65.4
6.1
22.9

211.3
192.5
17.3
1.5
250.8
153.9
78.7
48.0
27.2
96.9
70.3
65.5
4.8
26.5

252.0
224.5
23.0
4.5
286.8
180.0
86.2
64.9
28.9
106.8
75.1
69.3
5.7
31.7

276.2
250.7
18.0
7.6
352.2
226.2
111.5
73.3
41.4
126.0
90.2
89.5
0.7
35.8

302.8
266.6
24.2
11.9
409.5
235.9
126.4
74.3
35.2
173.6
132.5
132.5
0.0
41.1

330.5
303.0
20.6
7.0
408.2
247.3
130.5
76.9
39.9
160.9
121.6
121.6
0.0
39.3

366.4
336.0
22.7
7.7
422.6
265.6
137.1
82.4
46.1
156.9
122.6
122.6
0.0
34.3

402.8
369.5
24.9
8.4
440.2
282.3
145.0
87.9
49.4
158.0
121.8
121.8
0.0
36.1

441.3
404.8
27.3
9.2
451.9
297.9
149.3
96.6
52.1
153.9
114.7
114.7
0.0
39.2

Budget balance
o.w. primary budget balance

-23.7
70.7

-39.4
57.4

-34.8
72.0

-76.0
50.0

-106.7
66.9

-77.6
83.3

-56.2
100.8

-37.4
120.6

-10.6
143.4

Off-budget expenditure
BoJ cash losses 3/
Deferred financing 4/

4.8
4.8
0.0

5.7
5.7
0.0

2.3
0.7
1.6

-4.5
-4.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Public entities balance 5/
of which financed with loans and deposits drawdown
Net capital transfers to public entities

..
..
0.0

..
..
0.0

-31.5
-0.4
0.0

-26.3
5.9
0.0

-29.6
-2.4
0.0

-11.9
-0.5
0.0

-8.3
0.3
0.0

1.6
0.0
0.0

2.9
0.0
0.0

..

..

-68.6

-97.8

-136.3

-89.6

-64.5

-35.8

-7.7

70.8

68.3

37.1

71.5

106.7

77.6

56.2

37.4

10.6

140.0
33.1
16.1
106.9

164.7
59.6
17.5
105.1

99.1
30.3
15.6
68.8

105.8
31.5
18.6
74.3

105.5
23.7
18.5
81.8

145.6
20.0
16.9
125.6

174.7
64.1
23.6
110.6

333.9
62.2
31.1
271.7

345.1
64.1
30.3
281.0

Public sector balance
Net increase in central government debt
Principal Repayments
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Gross Financing Needs

210.8

233.0

136.2

177.3

212.2

223.2

230.9

371.3

355.6

Gross Financing Sources 6/
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Divestment + deposit drawdown

210.8
55.2
3.2
155.6
0.0

233.0
37.4
16.6
179.1
16.6

143.4
24.0
9.6
90.5
28.9

183.2
63.7
34.0
113.5
6.0

209.8
70.3
60.8
166.8
-27.3

222.7
45.4
35.2
149.8
27.4

231.1
76.0
23.6
154.4
0.7

371.3
75.7
31.1
295.6
0.0

355.6
79.5
30.3
276.2
0.0

856
856

950
950

1047
1047

1286
1286

1499
1463

1672
1567

1786
1671

1822
1740

1818
1780

Memo item:
Central government debt, J$ billion
Central government debt excluding IMF, J$ billion

Sources: Jamaican authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes the costs of divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica.
2/ Accrued interest on previous year's BoJ Special Issue Bonds has contractually been paid to the BoJ through debt issuance the following year.
3/ Refers to operating losses of the BoJ, not covered by the BoJ Special Issue Bonds.
4/ Debt issued upon assuming public investment projects carried out by the private sector.
5/ Includes selected public entities which are financially independent from the central government.
6/ For FY 2006/07 and FY 2007/08 the composition reflects the impact of external borrowing for pre-financing.

74
Table 3. Jamaica: Summary of Central Government Operations
(In percent of GDP)
Projection
Est.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Budgetary revenue and grants
Tax
Non-tax
Grants
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Wage and salaries
Other expenditure
Capital expenditure 1/
Interest
Domestic
Current
BoJ special issue bonds 2/
External

26.2
23.2
2.8
0.1
29.5
16.3
8.8
5.7
1.7
13.2
10.0
9.2
0.9
3.2

25.9
23.6
2.1
0.2
30.8
18.9
9.7
5.9
3.3
11.9
8.6
8.0
0.6
3.3

27.3
24.3
2.5
0.5
31.1
19.5
9.3
7.0
3.1
11.6
8.1
7.5
0.6
3.4

26.6
24.2
1.7
0.7
34.0
21.8
10.8
7.1
4.0
12.2
8.7
8.6
0.1
3.5

28.3
24.9
2.3
1.1
38.2
22.0
11.8
6.9
3.3
16.2
12.4
12.4
0.0
3.8

27.7
25.4
1.7
0.6
34.2
20.7
10.9
6.4
3.3
13.5
10.2
10.2
0.0
3.3

27.8
25.5
1.7
0.6
32.1
20.2
10.4
6.3
3.5
11.9
9.3
9.3
0.0
2.6

27.9
25.6
1.7
0.6
30.5
19.5
10.0
6.1
3.4
10.9
8.4
8.4
0.0
2.5

27.9
25.6
1.7
0.6
28.6
18.8
9.4
6.1
3.3
9.7
7.3
7.3
0.0
2.5

Budget balance
o.w. primary budget balance
o.w. underlying primary balance 3/

-3.3
9.9
..

-4.8
7.0
..

-3.8
7.8
..

-7.3
4.8
..

-10.0
6.2
5.2

-6.5
7.0
7.0

-4.3
7.7
7.7

-2.6
8.3
8.3

-0.7
9.1
9.1

1.0
1.0
0.0

1.5
1.5
0.0

1.1
0.9
0.2

-0.4
-0.4
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Public entities balance 6/
of which financed with loans and deposits
Net capital transfers to public entities

..
..
..

..
..
..

-3.4
-3.4
0.0

-2.5
-3.1
0.6

-2.8
-2.5
-0.2

-1.0
-1.0
0.0

-0.6
-0.6
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0

0.2
0.2
0.0

Public sector balance

..

..

-8.2

-9.4

-12.7

-7.5

-4.9

-2.5

-0.5

9.9

8.4

4.8

7.5

9.7

6.5

4.3

2.6

0.7

Principal Repayments
External
o.w. official
Domestic

19.6
4.6
2.2
15.0

20.2
7.3
2.1
12.9

10.7
3.3
1.7
7.5

10.2
3.0
1.8
7.2

9.9
2.2
1.7
7.6

12.2
1.7
1.4
10.5

13.3
4.9
1.8
8.4

23.1
4.3
2.2
18.8

21.8
4.1
1.9
17.8

Gross Financing Needs

29.5

28.6

15.5

17.7

19.6

18.7

17.5

25.7

22.5

Gross Financing Sources 6/
External
o.w. official
Domestic
Divestment + deposit drawdown

29.5
7.7
0.4
21.8
0.0

28.6
4.6
2.0
22.0
2.0

15.5
2.6
1.0
9.8
3.1

17.7
6.1
3.3
11.0
0.6

19.6
6.6
5.7
15.6
-2.5

18.7
3.8
2.9
12.5
2.3

17.5
5.8
1.8
11.7
0.1

25.7
5.2
2.2
20.5
0.0

22.5
5.0
1.9
17.5
0.0

119.9
119.9

116.5
116.5

113.5
113.5

124.0
124.0

140.0
136.6

140.0
131.2

135.6
126.8

126.1
120.4

114.9
112.5

Off-budget expenditure
BoJ cash losses 4/
Deferred financing 5/

Net increase in central government debt

Memo item:
Central government debt
Central government debt excluding IMF

Sources: Jamaican authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes the costs of divestment or liquidation of Air Jamaica.
2/ Accrued interest on previous year's BoJ Special Issue Bonds has contractually been paid to the BoJ through debt issuance the following year.
Starting in 2008/09 there is no further issuance of special issue bonds, and the central government pays all amounts due as debt when it settles
the Bank of Jamaica total losses concurrently for the fiscal year.
3/ Excludes one-off grants and nontax revenues in 2009/10.
4/ Refers to operating losses of the BoJ, not covered by the BoJ Special Issue Bonds.
5/ Debt issued upon assuming public investment projects carried out by the private sector.
6/ Includes selected public entities which are financially independent from the central government.
7/ For FY 2006/07 and FY 2007/08 the composition reflects the impact of external borrowing for pre-financing.

75
Table 4. Jamaica: Summary Balance of Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Proj.
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Current account
Trade balance
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Fuel (cif)
Exceptional imports (including FDI-related)
Other
Services (net)
Transportation
Travel

-1,186
-2,716
1,809
4,524
1,558
310
2,656
643
-290
1,372

-1,199
-3,008
2,202
5,210
1,730
631
2,849
614
-451
1,639

-2,436
-4,250
2,419
6,670
2,835
735
3,100
455
-564
1,678

-2,439
-4,481
2,311
6,792
2,805
613
3,373
471
-594
1,686

-1,129
-3,259
1,427
4,686
1,687
429
2,571
681
-386
1,712

-1,142
-3,525
1,565
5,090
1,994
338
2,758
811
-359
1,802

-905
-3,691
1,726
5,417
2,107
481
2,829
809
-396
1,888

-846
-3,753
1,863
5,616
2,217
463
2,936
864
-411
1,977

-760
-3,828
1,994
5,821
2,332
468
3,022
916
-426
2,072

1,619
-439
-702
1,589
130
1,459

1,920
-573
-615
1,810
141
1,669

1,980
-660
-712
2,071
134
1,937

1,938
-622
-536
2,107
106
2,000

1,956
-645
-517
1,966
105
1,861

2,052
-633
-480
2,053
88
1,965

2,145
-683
-343
2,319
88
2,232

2,243
-703
-374
2,417
88
2,330

2,346
-730
-420
2,571
88
2,484

Capital and financial account
Capital account (net)
Financial account (net) 1/
Direct investment (net)
of which: One-off sales of shares
Central government (net)

1,634
-3
1,638
608
0
334

1,439
-7
1,446
802
0
-413

1,928
-5
1,933
1,444
0
-194

1,997
28
1,969
629
300
125

867
-15
882
391
0
418

842
-11
853
308
0
166

1,152
-11
1,163
685
0
0

957
-11
967
444
0
0

1,028
-10
1,038
452
0
0

Other official (net) 2/
of which: PetroCaribe
Government prefinancing deposits
Portfolio investment (net)
Other private flows (net) 3/
Overall balance

227
12
-250
196
523
449

470
231
-100
-119
805
241

275
230
350
768
-710
-508

284
325
0
620
312
-442

740
245
0
-323
-344
-263

182
168
0
197
0
-300

188
160
0
289
0
247

153
153
0
371
0
111

158
158
0
428
0
269

Financing
Change in GIR (- increase)
Prospective IMF credits

-449
-449
0

-241
-241
0

508
508
0

442
442
0

263
-387
650

300
-100
400

-247
-484
237

-111
-42
-69

-269
61
-330

2,373
16.9
2,078
-10.5
15.4
22.6
57.1
11.1
11,301

2,614
15.1
2,329
-9.7
21.7
15.2
63.3
18.6
12,305

2,106
12.1
2,083
-18.4
9.9
28.0
77.6
3.1
13,245

1,664
12.8
1,629
-18.0
-4.5
1.8
88.2
-2.2
13,586

2,051
14.8
1,378
-9.4
-38.2
-31.0
65.3
1.0
12,055

2,151
14.6
1,078
-8.8
9.6
8.6
77.3
4.9
13,051

2,635
17.2
1,325
-6.6
10.3
6.4
79.9
4.5
13,708

2,677
16.9
1,436
-5.9
7.9
3.7
81.5
4.6
14,391

2,616
16.1
1,705
-5.0
7.0
3.7
83.4
4.6
15,159

of which : Tourism receipts
Other services
Income (net)
Current transfers (net)
Government (net)
Private (net)

Memorandum items:
Gross international reserves
(in weeks of perspective imports of GNFS)
Net international reserves
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Exports of goods (in percent change)
Imports of goods (in percent change)
Oil prices (composite, fiscal year basis)
Tourism receipts (in percent change)
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes estimates of a partial payment for the sales of a rum company in 2008/09.
2/ Includes counterpart to the inflow for the government's pre-financing in 2005/06, the new general SDR allocation in 2009/10.
3/ Capital flight accompanying the liability management operation is expected to take place in 2009/10 Q4.

76
Table 5. Jamaica: Summary Accounts of the Bank of Jamaica 1/
Proj.
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

136

158

150

145

123

101

130

-92
97
55
28
14
-11
-9
-1
-157
-20
-14

-106
97
45
35
17
-11
-11
-1
-166
-25
-19

-91
95
53
28
14
-13
-13
-1
-138
-34
-27

-74
125
75
46
4
-16
-18
-1
-119
-62
-54

-49
137
80
57
0
-23
-18
-1
-68
-93
-56

-23
137
80
57
0
-19
-17
-2
-39
-101
-64

-49
137
80
57
0
-17
-15
-2
-59
-108
-71

44
26
17

52
31
21

59
33
26

71
37
34

74
40
34

78
43
34

81
47
34

17.9

22.2

-7.9

-4.9

-22.0

-21.7

29.1

-15.9
1.7
-22.7
1.7
0.0
-13.5
-5.9

-14.0
0.2
-9.9
0.0
-0.3
-8.3
-5.6

14.9
-1.8
7.7
-2.1
0.1
27.5
-8.7

17.3
30.3
21.8
-3.3
-0.4
18.8
-28.1

24.9
12.0
5.5
-7.0
0.0
51.1
-31.3

25.4
0.0
0.0
4.0
-0.1
29.3
-7.7

-25.6
0.0
0.0
2.2
-0.1
-20.5
-7.1

Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks

2.0
2.7
-0.7

8.2
5.0
3.3

7.0
2.1
5.0

12.4
3.6
8.7

2.8
3.0
-0.2

3.8
3.6
0.2

3.6
3.5
0.1

Net international reserves

42.9

51.0

-15.2

-8.4

-30.9

-29.3

37.4

-38.2
4.1
4.1
0.0
-32.4
-14.1

-32.1
0.4
0.1
-0.8
-19.1
-12.7

28.8
-3.5
-4.1
0.1
53.1
-16.8

29.4
51.4
-5.6
-0.7
32.0
-47.8

34.9
16.9
-9.8
-0.1
71.8
-43.9

34.4
0.0
5.3
-0.2
39.6
-10.4

-32.8
0.0
2.8
-0.2
-26.3
-9.1

4.7
6.4
-1.7

18.8
11.4
7.5

13.5
4.0
9.6

21.0
6.2
14.8

4.0
4.2
-0.2

5.1
4.8
0.3

4.6
4.5
0.1

2,078

2,329

2,083

1,629

1,378

1,078

1,325

End-of-period stocks 1/
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net claims on central government 2/
Net claims on rest of public sector
Operating losses of the BOJ
Net credit to commercial banks
Of which : foreign prudential reserve
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)
Valuation adjustment
Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks
Fiscal year flows 1/
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net claims on central government 2/
Net credit to commercial banks
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Net credit to commercial banks
Net credit to other financial institutions
Open market operations
Other items net (incl. valuation adj.)
Base money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks
Memorandum items:
Net international reserves (US$ millions)
Sources: Bank of Jamaica; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
2/ Includes net unclassified and BoJ operating loss from the previous fiscal year.

77
Table 6. Jamaica: Summary Monetary Survey 1/

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

Proj.
2010/11

2011/12

120

130

132

94

75

51

77

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Of which: central government 2/
Open market operations (Net)
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

108
191
136
-116
106
36
-73
-14

123
194
128
-124
139
47
-85
-19

153
187
135
-94
172
60
-111
-27

223
225
160
-72
221
96
-149
-54

240
242
176
-49
230
100
-183
-55

300
249
183
-17
267
117
-198
-60

321
258
192
-28
304
134
-213
-65

Liabilities to private sector (M3)
Money supply (M2)
Foreign currency deposits

229
154
75

253
175
78

285
189
96

318
203
115

315
202
112

351
232
119

399
271
127

3.7

9.6

2.3

-37.8

-19.4

-24.2

26.7

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector 2/
Of which: central government
Open market operations
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

14.5
12.5
-11.9
-5.7
13.1
3.5
-5.4
-6.6

15.0
2.8
-8.0
-8.7
32.6
10.5
-11.7
-5.3

29.3
-6.7
6.7
29.7
33.0
13.5
-26.7
-8.3

70.7
37.4
24.7
22.2
49.0
35.1
-38.0
-26.6

16.4
17.5
16.1
23.0
9.8
4.5
-33.9
-1.2

60.5
7.1
7.1
32.1
36.4
16.8
-15.0
-4.8

21.2
9.3
9.3
-10.7
37.7
17.6
-15.1
-4.8

Liabilities to private sector (M3)
Money supply (M2)
Foreign currency deposits

18.2
14.2
3.9

24.6
21.8
2.9

31.6
13.8
17.8

32.9
13.6
19.3

-3.0
-0.6
-2.5

36.3
30.1
6.2

47.9
39.0
8.9

1.7

4.2

0.9

-13.3

-6.1

-7.7

7.6

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector 2/
Of which: central government
Open market operations
Credit to private sector
Of which: foreign currency
Other 3/
Of which: valuation adjustment

6.9
5.9
-5.6
-2.7
6.2
1.7
-2.6
-3.1

6.6
1.2
-3.5
-3.8
14.3
4.6
-5.1
-2.3

11.6
-2.6
2.7
11.7
13.0
5.3
-10.5
-3.3

24.8
13.1
8.7
7.8
17.2
12.3
-13.3
-9.3

5.2
5.5
5.1
7.2
3.1
1.4
-10.7
-0.4

19.2
2.2
2.2
10.2
11.6
5.3
-4.8
-1.5

6.0
2.7
2.7
-3.1
10.8
5.0
-4.3
-1.4

Liabilities to private sector (M3)

8.6

10.8

12.5

11.6

-1.0

11.5

13.7

43.6
5.2
1841
3.1

51.8
4.9
1921
3.2

58.8
4.8
1865
3.2

71.2
4.5
1072
3.3

74.0
4.3
840
3.4

77.8
4.5
540
3.4

81.4
4.9
787
3.3

End-of-period stocks 1/
Net foreign assets

Fiscal year flows 1/
Net foreign assets

Net foreign assets

Memorandum items:
Monetary base (J$ Millions)
M3/monetary base
Net foreign assets (US$ Millions)
M3 velocity

Sources: Bank of Jamaica; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
2/ Includes Bank of Jamaica operating balance.
3/ Includes net credit to nonbank financial institutions, capital accounts, valuation
adjustment, securities sold under repurchase agreements and net unclassified assets.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

JAMAICA

Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By
Arrangement—Informational Annex

Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department

January 29, 2010

Contents

Page

Appendices
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Fund Relations ......................................................................................................................... 2
Relations with the World Bank ............................................................................................... 5
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank ........................................................ 10
Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................... 14

2
Appendix I. Jamaica—Fund Relations
(As of December 31, 2009)

I. Membership Status: Joined: February 21, 1963; Article VIII
II. General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position
Holdings exchange rate

SDR Million
273.50
273.55
0.00

% Quota
100.00
100.02
0.00

III. SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
261.64
221.01

% Allocation
100.00
84.47

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None
V. Latest Financial Arrangements:

Type
EFF
Stand-By
Stand-By

Amount
Approval
Expiration
Approved
Amount Drawn
Date
Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million)
Dec. 11, 1992 Mar. 16, 1996
109.13
77.75
Jun. 28, 1991 Sep. 30, 1992
43.65
43.65
Mar. 23, 1990 May 31, 1991
82.00
82.00

VI. Projected Payments to Fund1:
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

2008
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

0.11
0.11

2009
0.11
0.11

Forthcoming
2010
2011
0.11
0.11

0.11
0.11

2012
0.11
0.11

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not Applicable

1

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such
arrears will be shown in this section.

3
VIII. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): Not Applicable
IX. Exchange Rate Arrangements:
The external value of the Jamaican dollar has been determined in an interbank market
operated by commercial banks beginning September 17, 1990. The Jamaican dollar has
depreciated significantly since that time. At January 26, 2010 it was trading at around J$89½
to the U.S. dollar.
X.

Last Article IV Consultation and Program Relations:

Jamaica is under intensified surveillance whereby staff monitors the implementation of the
economic strategy formulated by the authorities without reaching prior understandings with
the Fund. The last Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on
April 21, 2008 (Country Report No. 08/199). Interim staff reports are prepared for
information of the Executive Board in-between Article IV consultations (Country Report
No. 06/324, Country Report No. 05/61, and Country Report No. 05/219).
XI.

Technical Assistance:
Department

Dates

FAD
LEG/MCM

December 2009
February 2008

FAD
MAE

September 2006
May 1995
October–December 1995
February–June 1996
September 1996
October 1996
February 1997
May 1997
August 1997
January 1998
April 1998
May 1998
April 2001
January 2002
September 1996
July 2002

STA

Purpose
Tax Policy
Financial Sector Regulatory and
Supervisory Frameworks
Tax and Customs Administration
Review of deposit insurance scheme
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Banking crisis and restructuring
Banking supervision
Central bank accounting
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Public debt management
Financial sector restructuring
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Multisector statistics assessment
Organization of Statistics Office

4
XII.

Resident Representative:
The post of the resident representative was closed on August 1997.

5

Appendix II. Jamaica—Relations with the World Bank
(As of January 21, 2010)
A new Jamaica-World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is being prepared for
Board presentation on, or about, February 23, 2010, following extensive consultations with
key stakeholders. This CPS, which will guide support from the Bank Group during 20102013, supersedes the Country Assistance Program that ended in June 2009. The new strategy
is fully aligned with the government’s outcome-oriented medium-term framework and
broadens potential Bank support compared with the last four-year country strategy. The last
strategy focused mostly on human development, including support for the Program of
Advancement through Health and Education (PATH) and projects in inner-city communities.
The Bank considers it important to continue this focus, in addition to the work it has started
on fiscal and debt sustainability issues in 2009, and to address more directly the growth
agenda through approaches to improve competitiveness and skills development. The IFC will
work with the private sector and collaborate with the Bank on the regulatory and privatepublic partnership issues to strengthen Bank Group synergies in Jamaica.
A. Projects
The Second Jamaica HIV/AIDS Project was approved in May 2008 for US$10 million.
The project development objective is to assist in the implementation of the Government's
National HIV/AIDS Program by: a) supporting the deepening of prevention interventions
targeted at high risk groups and the general population; b) increasing of access to treatment,
care and support services for infected and affected individuals; c) strengthening the program
management and analysis to identify priorities for building the capacity of the health sector to
respond to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and other priority health problems. Specifically, the
principal project is designed to: (i) support the scaling up of HIV/AIDS prevention
interventions so as to halt and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS; (ii) provide financing to
strengthen the diagnostic capacity, enhance services (HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted
infections, tuberculosis and prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV) and support
for those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS; (iii) strengthen institutional capacity in
supporting policy formulation for an enabling legal and regulatory environment, program
management and monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) support health sector development
through the strengthening of biomedical waste management and capacity assessment.
The Jamaica Social Protection Project (SPP) was approved in May 2008 for US$40
million. The Jamaica Social Protection Project will: (i) further improve the effectiveness of
the Program of Advancement through Health and Education (PATH) in order to foster
investment by poor families in human capital accumulation; (ii) develop a structured system
for assisting working-age members of PATH eligible households seek and retain
employment; (iii) enable the formulation of a reform program for the public sector pension
schemes; and (iv) develop a holistic social protection strategy. The first component,
improving effectiveness of the PATH, will support the PATH through: (a) co-financing for

6
conditional cash transfers to children 0 to 19 years-old (child grants); and (b) technical
improvements to the program. The second component, building capacity for the Steps-toWork (StW) program, will support capacity building within the Ministry of Labor and Social
Security (MLSS) to implement a new initiative. The StW program will target working age
members of PATH eligible households for referral to the relevant support services to enable
them to seek and retain employment. The third component, improving the public sector
pension system administration and building capacity for reform, will support two core sets of
activities focused on the schemes for public sector workers: (i) preparation of a reform
program; and (ii) improving administration and information systems. The final component is
the development of a holistic social protection strategy. This component will support the
Government in developing a holistic social protection strategy to inform decision-making on
the appropriate policies and programs to address social risks and vulnerabilities within the
population.
The Jamaica Hurricane Dean Recovery Project was approved in December 2008 for
US$10 million. The objective of the project is to provide funding to support the restoration of
levels of service in selected community infrastructure. Specifically, basic, primary and allage schools, health clinics and critical feeder roads, at a minimum to pre-hurricane levels,
and to increase the Government's ability to respond to natural hazards. The proposed loan
incorporates three project components: 1) repair and reconstruction of basic infrastructure; 2)
capacity building for hazard risk reduction; and 3) project management. Component one has
four subcomponents: basic school finance restoration of early childhood schools
infrastructure; restoration of primary and all-age schools infrastructure; finance restoration of
community clinics including type I, II and III facilities; and finance restoration of feeder
roads. Component two has two subcomponents which include financing support for training
on disaster preparedness and mitigation for local government and relevant stakeholders and
to finance studies and activities to strengthen the capacity to better respond to natural hazards
taking into account lessons learned from past events.
The Jamaica Rural Education Transformation Development Initiative (REDI) was
approved in September 2009 for US$15 million. The objective of REDI is to improve market
access for rural micro and small-scale producers of agriculture and tourism products, as well
as, other service providers. There are three components to the project. The first component,
which is support for rural subprojects in agriculture and tourism, will see the Bank financing
two types of subprojects: type A will support revenue generating activities in agriculture and
tourism, and type B will support provision of critical infrastructure, marketing, and
management in the agriculture and tourism sectors. The second component of the project
gives support through national technical assistance and capacity building. The main goal of
this component is to strengthen relevant national organizations to enhance their capacity to
continue assisting the rural enterprises and other project partners and ensure the sustainability
of the rural enterprises. Hence, the component will finance technical assistance and capacity
building for key organizations and agencies that deliver support services in agriculture and

7
rural tourism at the local level. The third component of the project is project management.
This component will finance project management, technical expertise (tourism and
agricultural specialists, monitoring and evaluation) staff training, the annual audit, vehicles,
office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective
fiduciary arrangements are in place during implementation.
The Jamaica Early Childhood Development Project was approved in May 2008 for US$15
million. The objectives are to: (i) improve the monitoring of children’s development, the
screening of household-level risks affecting such development, and early intervention
systems of the borrower to promote such development (ii) enhance the quality of early
childhood schools and care facilities; and (iii) strengthen early childhood organizations and
institutions. There are two components to the project. The first component is co-financing the
implementation of the National Strategic Plan under Sector-Wide Approach modalities. This
component area foresees the strengthening of the Early Childhood Commissions (ECC’s)
parenting Sub-Committee, the development and implementation of a national Early
Childhood Development parenting education and support sub-strategy, and a public
awareness campaign. It includes the creation of an accreditation system for early childhood
parenting education and support programs and a grant facility to support service providers in
meeting accreditation standards. This component area also includes the development of a
national policy for screening, referral and early intervention. The development of a screening
system for household-level risks and its application to all households enrolled in the
Government of Jamaica’s income support program is also provide for under this component.
The second component will finance selected consultant services critical to achieve the project
development objective. This component will support the development of a national policy on
screening, referral and early intervention, including the design of a screening system for risks
at the household level, and the development of a public education strategy about risks for
children. It will finance development of sub-strategies for parenting of children aged of 0-3
and 4-6 years, including the mapping of existing parenting education and support programs,
the development of an accreditation system for parenting programs, and awareness and
advocacy strategies for parenting support programs. It will finance the development of
service delivery models for nutritional programs, targeted at different age groups and a
strategy for the reorganization and strengthening of well-child clinics.

The Jamaica Education Transformation Capacity Building project was approved in
November 2009 for US$15 million. The objective of the Education Transformation Capacity
Building Project for Jamaica is to build the capacity of the emerging key agencies (National
Education Inspectorate (NEI), Jamaica Teaching Council (JTC), Regional Education
Authorities (REA), and National Education Trust (NET) that are being established to support
the national Education System Transformation Program (ESTP). There are three components
to the project. The first component is the enhanced performance and accountability.
Enhanced performance and accountability will contribute to the implementation of the
Government of Jamaica ESTP by making operational the following key agencies to form a
coherent system to monitor progress and improve accountability and quality: NEI, JTC, and
REA. The second component is the mechanisms to mobilize resources to the NET. The NET

8
will be the vehicle through which the Ministry of Education (MoE) will secure a consistent
and reliable source of funds to support capital programs in education with a particular focus
on, but not limited to, infrastructure. Mechanisms will be established to attract funding from
the Diaspora, the private sector, and other sources. Finally, the third component is the
communications, project management, and monitoring and evaluation. This component will
support the implementation of a strategic communications strategy; provision of staffing,
training, purchase of necessary equipment and materials, and operating costs for the MoE
change management unit, responsible for overseeing implementation of the ESTP; and
support to carry out evaluations of the ESTP, and annual external audits of project financing.
The Jamaica Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project was approved in March 2006
for US$29.3 million. The project development objective is to improve quality of life in 12
Jamaican inner-city areas and poor urban informal settlements through improved access to
basic urban infrastructure, financial services, land tenure regularization, enhanced
community capacity and improvements in public safety. Specifically, the project will:
(a) increase access and improve the quality of water, sanitation, solid waste collection
systems, electricity, roads, drainage and related community infrastructure for over 60,000
residents of poor urban informal settlements through capital investments and innovative
arrangements for operations and maintenance; (b) facilitate access to microfinance for
enterprise development and incremental home improvement for entrepreneurs and residents
in project areas; (c) increase security of tenure for eligible households in project areas; and
(d) enhance public safety through mediation services, community capacity building, skills
training and related social services. In addition, the Bank has number of technical assistance
initiatives focused on statistics, crime and violence and disaster risk reduction and
management.
B. Economic and Sector Work
The Bank is in the process of preparing the second Development Policy Loan operation to
assist the Government of Jamaica in improving fiscal and debt sustainability during FY1013. The proposed operation is rooted in the CPS of Jamaica and the World Bank Group and
will support policy actions in the following areas: (i) promoting fiscal sustainability through
and the establishment of a Fiscal Responsibility Framework, rationalization and
modernization of Public Bodies, and developing a strategic framework for improved debt
management; (ii) increasing the efficiency of public financial management and budgeting
processes; and (iii) reducing distortions and enhancing the efficiency and fairness of the tax
system. The program’s analytical underpinnings includes a Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM), a Public Expenditure Review (PER), and a Poverty Assessment, as well as, work by
the Government, local think-tanks, and universities.
The Bank is also preparing a new Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) focused on
growth obstacles in Jamaica. The objective of the study is to identify the most critical factors

9
behind the low growth history of Jamaica and develop policy recommendations for unlocking
the potential for high growth.
C. Financial Relations1
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Project
Rural Economic Development Initiative
Jamaica Early Childhood Development Project
Jamaica Hurricane Dean ERL
JM- Education Transformation Capacity Building
JM – Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project
Second HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Project
(Second Phase)
Social Protection Project
Total

Original
Amount
15.0
15.0
10.0
16.0
29.3

Available
0.0
3.3
5.5
0.0
9.3

Disbursed
Outstanding
15.0
11.7
4.5
16.0
20.0

10.0

1.8

8.2

40.0
135.3

7.3
27.2

32.7
108.1

1/ Amounts may not add up to Original Principal due to changes in the SDR/US exchange rate since signing.

Total
disbursements
Repayments
Net
disbursements
Interest and fees

Disbursements and Debt Service (Fiscal Year Ending June 30)
Actual
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
2007 2008

2009

Projections
2010

65.1
70.1

97.6
56.9

82.4
45.7

85.0
44.9

-5.0
22.8

40.7
21.6

36.7
20.3

40.1
21.9

11.3
47.4
36.1
18.9

8.5
43.4

21.7
39.7

17.3
45.8

16.0
47.9

118.7
48.4

207.9
23.5

-34.9
17.5

-17.9
20.5

-28.5
22.4

-31.9
21.6

70.3
16.6

184.4
7.1

10
Appendix III. Jamaica—Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank
Jamaica joined the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in 1969. Since then, the
IDB has approved 109 loans (94 projects) to Jamaica amounting to US$2.4 billion and
211 technical cooperation operations totaling US$67.5 million. IDB financial assistance has
supported a wide range of infrastructural, environmental and social sector projects with a
view to enhancing Jamaica’s human resource and absorptive capacity and strengthening the
foundation for private sector-led growth. In addition, the IDB has supported reforms aimed at
strengthening the institutional and regulatory environment.
The IDB is the leading lender to Jamaica among multilateral development partners. As of
December 2009, Jamaica’s outstanding debt to the IDB stood at US$ 734.6 million, of which
US$581.8 million were public sector loans and US$1.4 million were loans to the private
sector. The total represents 11 percent of public external debt and 52 percent of multilateral
debt.
Table 1. IDB Outstanding Debt
Type

Amount (US$ mn.)

Public Sector
Private Sector

581.8

Total Debt Outstanding

734.6

1.4

Starting in 2004 there was a drastic reduction in the fiscal space needed to disburse existing
Bank loans. As a result over US$50m of the portfolio had to be cancelled and no new loans
were approved from 2004 to 2008. The new administration that took office in 2007
intensified Jamaica's reform program and emphasized a policy of expanding IFI financing for
its development program. In response, the IDB updated the 2006-2009 country
strategy renewing the lending program based on three basic principles:




Aim for positive net flows in Jamaica’s favor in order to provide countercyclical
support during the economic downturn, depending on the degree of reform;
No new debt, so that our policy-based lending would not add to Jamaica’s debt load
but rather help improve its debt profile;
Cash flow savings arising from better loan terms should go toward faster debt
reduction, growth-boosting investments or poverty alleviation.

This ushered in a new generation of Bank lending to Jamaica. The IDB approved eight new
loans for a total of US$ 405 million for Jamaica in 2008, including a US$200m loan to
increase private bank lending to the real sector; a US$60 million policy based loan for
improving public financial management; US$50 million for road rehabilitation; US$30
million for education reform; a US$30 million policy based loan for competitiveness; US$14
million for primary schools; US$11 million for youth at risk; and US$10 million for

11
rebuilding infrastructure damaged by floods.
This upward trend continued in January 2009 when the Bank approved two more loan
operations: a US$300 million liquidity program to protect the real sector from lost credit
lines; and a US$15m social safety net program. In September 2009, a US$70m loan was
approved to expand the highway network. Two more loans were expected to be approved
before the end of 2009: US$21 million for a citizen security and justice program and US$10
million for road improvement.
The IDB is currently preparing the Country Strategy with Jamaica for 2010-2012. Since the
policy-based loans described above are programmatic in nature, it is expected that the Bank
will provide new loans to support subsequent phases of the reforms they target. This lending
modality is expected to dominate the Bank’s program with Jamaica in the new strategy
period.
As of December 2009, the Bank’s portfolio consisted of 13 investment loans2 valued at
US$512 million, and 41 non-reimbursable technical cooperations valued at US$19.8 million.
Thirty-four percent of the IDB project funds and fifty-two percent of the TC funds have been
disbursed, leaving US$ 346.1 million available for disbursement.
Table 2. Major Ongoing Projects
Project Category

Number

Amount (US$ mn.)

Percent Disbursed

Projects in execution

12

512

57

Private sector loans

1

5.0

0

IIC loans

8

40.8 1/

22

41

19.8

52

TCs in execution
1/ Approved amount.

Three policy-based loans and one hybrid PBL/Investment loan totaling US$200 million
are slated for approval in the first half of 2010. These represent the continuation of the
support for specific reforms that started in 2008. The policy areas include: education, human
capital protection, competitiveness, and public financial management. In addition to the
specific reforms in each operation the PBL program is also conditional upon Jamaica
maintaining a stable economic environment conducive to the continuation of the reform
process. Jamaica also has the option of requesting support from the Bank’s Emergency
Program. It is important to note that the scope of the IDB’s support for Jamaica’s reform
agenda and its efforts to ensure macroeconomic stability are fully coordinated with other
multilateral development banks.

2

Including private sector loan but excluding IIC

12
Table 3. Number of Projects by implementation Progress Category
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 (June)

Highly Satisfactory

0

0

0

0

1

Satisfactory

7

7

8

11

10

Unsatisfactory

4

3

0

1

2

Very unsatisfactory

2

0

1

0

0

13

10

9

12

13

TOTAL

Disbursements reached a low point of US$12.5 million in 2005, but have rebounded ever
since. They doubled to US$25 million in 2006, and reached US$34 million in 2007. Due in
large part policy-based lending in 2008 and the approval of the liquidity program in 2009,
total disbursements rose dramatically to US$144.2 million, and US$151.5 million in those
years respectively.
Table 4. Net Flow of IDB Convertible Currencies
(US$ million)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

12.8

25.9

34.3

144.2

151.5

51.2

64.1

83.5

73.8

74.0

c. Net loan flow (a–b)

-38.4

-38.2

-49.2

70.4

77.5

d. Interest and charges

29.8

28.0

27.1

24.0

34.0

-73.6

-70.6

-78.1

46.4

43.5

a. Loan disbursements
(including PBLs)

b. Repayments (principal)

e. Net cash flow (c– d) 1/1

In keeping with the agenda to improve and use national systems the Government of Jamaica,
with the support of multilateral institutions and bilateral donors has prepared a wide range of
studies in different areas, including a joint World Bank and IDB, Country Financial
Accountability Assessment and Country Procurement Assessment Report (CFAA/CPAR) in
2005, and a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Report (PEFA) in May 2007.
Following the recommended actions of those reports, the IDB and the Government agreed on
the main areas of the local fiduciary systems for financial control and procurement
procedures that needed to be strengthened, and the IDB went on to provide resources to
finance development and reform activities stemming from the CFAA/CPAR, with nonreimbursable technical cooperation funds. Furthermore, in order to ascertain progress made
in recent years and to determine eligibility to audit IDB-funded projects a follow-up
assessment of the Office of the Auditor General of Jamaica is due for completion in early
2010.

13
Since 2007, Jamaica has developed a comprehensive handbook, more concrete regulations
defining its public procurement including a procedure for managing contractual disputes,
enhanced accessibility of information, separation of the Office of Contractor General and the
National Contracts Committee, as well as creating national standard bidding documents.
Although the national procurement system conforms to established principles of procurement
based on international standards, some outstanding issues remain to be resolved. With the
agreement of the Government of Jamaica, the IDB would undertake an update of the latest
country assessment of the national procurement system to identify (a) the improvements in
the pertinent aspects of the country procurement system, and (b) the readiness to rely on
Jamaica’s national procurement systems for Bank-financed projects with a view to adoption
of procurement country systems. Ideally, this work can be accomplished together with the
World Bank. In addition, the IDB PRODEV facility and the PFPM Programmatic PBL will
also support the introduction of performance-based budgets and accrual accounting. The
Multi-lateral Investment Fund (MIF) will also promote better access by Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) to public procurement.

Table 5. Total Projected Debt Service, 2010-2014
(Millions of U.S. dollars equivalent)
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Principal

71.3

60.1

200.5

200.5

58.6

Interest

31.5

33.7

30.5

21.6

14.7

102.8

93.8

231.0

222.1

73.4

Total

14

Appendix IV. Jamaica—Statistical Issues
Effective surveillance is hampered by data gaps for the financial sector outside of
commercial banks, and for public entities outside of the central government. In early 2003,
Jamaica started participating in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS),
which provides participants with a framework for the development of the statistical system.
Jamaica should now focus its efforts on improving its data and dissemination practices by
moving towards the goal of subscribing to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS)
over the medium term. No data on industrial production, wholesale or producer prices,
import volumes, or export and import prices have been reported for publication in the
International Financial Statistics (IFS) in recent years.
Key websites for statistics on Jamaica:
Bank of Jamaica:
Ministry of Finance and Planning:
Planning Institute of Jamaica:
Statistical Institute of Jamaica:

http://www.boj.org.jm/
http://www.mof.gov.jm/
http://www.pioj.gov.jm/
http://www.statinja.com/

There are significant weaknesses in the national accounts and other real sector data. In regard
to GDP estimates, concerns relate both to level and growth rate. Addressing these
shortcomings has been hindered, inter alia, by insufficient legal authority granted to the
Statistical Institute of Jamaica (STATIN) to collect source data, as well as by institutional
weaknesses, and a lack of resources. However, efforts are being made to improve the
national accounts, including through updating the base year (currently dating back to 1996)
and implementing the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA93). Assistance on national
accounts methodology has been provided by Statistics Canada and STA. The first publication
of quarterly national accounts took place in August 2002.
Prices
Jamaica (with assistance from the IMF Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Center,
CARTAC) revised its consumer price index (CPI) series in 2007. The CPI revision updated
expenditure weights of the CPI that had dated from 1984. The new CPI weights are based on
a household survey conducted in 2004–05.

15
Government finance statistics
Central government operations and debt data are updated on a monthly basis. Some
expenditures, however, are not recorded during the period they actually occur, making it
difficult to asses the fiscal policy stance. Also, data on public entities outside the central
government, although regularly published, are not reported consistently across entities and in
a way that is amenable to assessing and formulating the overall direction of fiscal policy.
There is a paucity of data on the external debt stocks and maturities falling due for the
nonfinancial public sector.
Government finance statistics are available at:
Debt: http://www.mof.gov.jm/dmu/
Budget: http://www.mof.gov.jm/programmes/em/fpmu/default.shtml
However, fiscal data are not currently reported for publication in the IFS. In 2007, the
authorities reported data for 2006, in GFSM 2001 format, for publication in the 2007 GFS
Yearbook.
Monetary and financial statistics
Monetary statistics published by the Bank of Jamaica (BOJ) are sectorized, classified, and
valued in accordance with international standards, and are provided to the Fund in a timely
manner. Currently, information on deposit money banks and monetary authorities is being
reported on a regular basis. The BOJ initiated the submission of monetary and financial
statistics based on standardized report forms in March 2007. Financial sector statistics
outside of the banking system are weak. The absence of adequate data on security dealers is
particularly problematic, as dealers’ liabilities to the public are larger than those of banks.
Consequently, related systemic implications are difficult to assess without timely and
comprehensive statistics.
Balance of payments
The BOJ compiles and disseminates balance of payments statistics on a monthly and annual
basis. Detailed annual balance of payments and international investment position (IIP) data
are reported by the BOJ for publication in the Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook
(BOPSY) and the IFS. In September 2007, Jamaica reported for the first time IIP data to
STA; annual IIP data since 2005 are now available in BOPSY and IFS.

16

JAMAICA: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF MARCH 21, 2008
Date of latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data6

Frequency
of
Reporting6

Frequency
of
publication
6

1

Exchange Rates

11/07

1/08

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities1

11/07

01/08

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

11/07

2/08

M

M

M

Broad Money

11/07

2/08

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

11/07

2/08

W

W

W

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

11/07

2/08

M

M

M

Interest Rates2

11/07

2/08

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

02/08

3/08

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3 – General
Government4

02/07

03/07

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3– Central
Government

02/07

03/07

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

02/07

03/07

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

2006

9/07

M

M

M

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2006

9/07

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Q4/06

04/07

Q

Q

Q

Gross External Debt

02/07

03/07

M

M

M

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered, as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes
and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds),
and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
JAMAICA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Stand-By
Arrangement
Supplementary Information
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Gilbert Terrier and Dominique Desruelle
February 2, 2010
This supplement reports on economic and policy developments since the Staff Report was
issued on January 29, 2010. This information does not change the thrust of the Staff
Appraisal.
The Debt Exchange
1.
The outcome of the debt exchange operation was somewhat better than
envisaged in the Staff Report. Preliminary data provided by the authorities indicate that the
participation rate reached 92 percent as of January 27, 2010. The deadline to take part in the
exchange has been extended to February 3rd, to accommodate small investors. Preliminary
staff estimates point to interest savings of 3-3½ percent of GDP in FY 2010/11, independent
of any assumptions regarding interest rate developments during the coming fiscal year
(beginning on April 1). Compared with the staff report, interest payments are now projected
to be 0.6 percent of GDP lower, both in FY 2010/11 and in FY 2011/12. In addition,
maturing domestic amortizations over the next three fiscal years have been reduced, on
average, by around 65 percent (this compares with 45 percent in the Staff Report).
2.
Market conditions have begun to normalize since the launch of Jamaica’s
domestic debt exchange operation (Figure 1). Domestic interest rates have declined by an
average of 520 basis points, as yield curves have shifted steadily downward. External bond
prices on Jamaican sovereigns have also rallied, given the apparent success of the debt
exchange and the overall integrity of the economic reform strategy.
3.
However, pressure in foreign exchange (FX) markets prompted the Bank of
Jamaica to intervene in recent weeks. Net intervention amounted to around US$50 million
in January and reserves currently stand at US$1.6 billion (slightly less than 3 months of
imports). While FX pressure in early January was largely explained by uncertainties related
to the upcoming debt exchange operation, pressure in most recent days is related to a strong
demand for foreign exchange by local investors for Jamaican Eurobonds. Although, as

2
anticipated, the domestic financial markets remain closed to the government, access is
expected to be restored after the closure of the debt exchange and approval of the Fundsupported program.
Air Jamaica
4.
The authorities have made progress toward divesting Air Jamaica. The
government asked the Air Jamaica Board to resign in December 2009 and has appointed new
Board members. On January 22, 2010, the authorities signed a Letter of Intent with
Caribbean Airlines, a company owned by the government of Trinidad and Tobago. Under the
arrangement, Caribbean Airlines would maintain air operations in Jamaica, while Air
Jamaica would cease operations by June 30, 2010. Under the terms of the agreement in
principle, the parties are committed to making their best efforts to sign legally-binding
agreements by March 31, 2010.
5.
The authorities’ actions are consistent with the program’s objectives and their
commitment of having Air Jamaica off the public sector books as soon as possible.
Staff’s opinion is that the prior action was not met, because the Letter of Intent with
Caribbean Airlines is nonbinding. However, based on the significant overall progress made
under the program, including the other two prior actions (implementation of a substantial tax
package and a successful debt exchange), staff recommends proceeding with the approval of
the program. In addition, staff notes that the authorities made good-faith efforts to comply
with the Air Jamaica prior action and that the key timelines for the closure of Air Jamaica
remain intact. Staff plans to revisit the progress on Air Jamaica divestment/liquidation at the
time of the first review under the program.

3
Figure 1. Jamaica: Financial Sector Developments, January 2010
The successful debt exchange operation has contributed to a decline in interest rates...
100

20
Jamaican Government Yield Curve (J$)

19

Jan 4

95

18

Jamaica Eurobond Prices, January 2010
(Maturing 10-30 years)
JDX
discussions
with market

90
Jan 14 (JDX
launched)

17

85

16

JDX
launched

Original
close date

Oct 25

15

80

14

75

13

Feb 36

Mar 39

70

12

Jan 29

65

11

60

10
3M

1Y

5Y

10

15

1-Jan

20

6-Jan 11-Jan 14-Jan 19-Jan 22-Jan 27-Jan

...and spreads. However, the recent rally in external bond prices has increased the demand for
foreign exchange, contributing to a decline in reserves.
14

89.6
Eurobond Spreads, January 2008 - January 2010

12

"Exploratory
talks" on
Fund SBA

Lehman
shock

10

20
FX Market Intervention, January 2010

89.4

18

Net Intervention (USD Millions,
right)

16

Exchange rate (J$/US$)

89.2

14

Jamaica

8

89.0

6

88.8

4

88.6

12
10
8
6
4

2

88.4

Emerging Markets

2

Latin America

0

88.2

0
Jan-08

Apr-08

Jul-08

Oct-08

Jan-09

Apr-09

Jul-09

Oct-09

Jan-10

4-Jan

Source: Jamaican authorities; Bloomberg LP; JP Morgan; and Fund staff calculations

7-Jan

12-Jan

15-Jan

20-Jan

25-Jan

28-Jan

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/115
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 18, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with
Jamaica
On February 4, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Jamaica.1
Background
The Jamaican economy has been deeply impacted by the global crisis. Real Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) is projected to fall by 3.5 percent in FY 2009/10. Mining production and
remittances have fallen sharply. Tourism has also been negatively affected, although it has
proven to be far more resilient than in the rest of the Caribbean. Inflation fell steadily from 26.5
percent in August 2008 to 9 percent in November 2009, reflecting weak domestic demand and a
decline in global commodity prices from their mid-2008 peaks. The external current account
deficit is expected to narrow from 18 percent of GDP to 9.5 percent, as the contraction in
imports exceeds, by far, that of exports.
Government finances have deteriorated despite the introduction of fiscal measures equivalent to
almost 2 percent of GDP. The public sector deficit is projected to widen from 9.5 percent of
GDP in FY 2008/09 to 12.75 percent of GDP in FY 2009/10, owing mainly to increases in
interest payments and public wage costs.
Over the past year and a half, concerns about economic prospects and the sustainability of
Jamaica’s public debt, which stands at 135 percent of GDP, have placed pressure on the
currency. In the aftermath of the September 2008 shock, the central bank intervened in the
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm

2
foreign exchange market and also tightened monetary conditions, including a 680 basis point
increase in the policy rate to 21.5 percent. Net international reserves fell from US$2.3 billion in
September 2008 to US$1.6 billion in February 2009, while the currency depreciated by over
20 percent against the U.S. dollar. In more recent months, a drop in inflation has allowed the
central bank to cut its policy rate, while some stability has returned in the foreign exchange
market. At end-2009, net international reserves stood at US$1.7 billion (equivalent to
three months of imports), after having been boosted by the SDR allocation (US$320 million).
Executive Board Assessment
The Executive Directors observed that Jamaica’s persistently weak fiscal position and
unsustainable debt burden had magnified the fallout from the global economic crisis. Lack of
access to external financing and large fiscal and balance of payments gaps had constrained the
authorities’ room for policy maneuver. Directors underscored the urgency of fundamental
reforms to break the vicious cycle of low growth and high debt dynamics. Full implementation of
the ambitious economic strategy that underpins the Fund-supported program2 is of critical
importance, with its three pillars being: medium-term fiscal consolidation and reforms to
entrench fiscal discipline, a debt strategy aimed at reducing interest costs, and financial sector
reforms to address systemic sources of risk.
Directors supported the goal of eliminating the overall public sector deficit in four years and
putting the debt on a clear downward path. They welcomed the package of revenue measures
recently introduced and the planned expenditure measures to be included in the FY 2010/11
budget. Directors emphasized the need to reduce distortions by eliminating exemptions and tax
incentives, and saw scope for further action in this regard. They endorsed measures to contain
recurrent spending and plans to increase spending on targeted social safety net programs.
While acknowledging that the proposed extension of the wage freeze is necessary in the short
term, Directors called on the authorities to implement more sustainable public employment
reforms, with a view to securing fiscal savings over the long term.
Directors stressed the importance of addressing longstanding institutional weaknesses through
structural reforms. High priorities in this regard include swift passage of fiscal responsibility
legislation and creation of a Central Treasury Management System to strengthen budget
execution and accountability. Renewed efforts are also crucial to rationalize the public
enterprise sector and eliminate deficits in large loss-making companies. Directors welcomed
recent steps to divest Air Jamaica and encouraged the authorities to make further efforts to
successfully conclude ongoing discussions with a foreign airline.
Directors commended the authorities for the successful completion of a par-to-par debt
exchange operation, enabling a more equitable burden sharing of the fiscal adjustment and
effectively balancing the need to secure cash flow savings without jeopardizing financial sector
stability. Temporary liquidity support provided by the Financial System Support Fund would help
sustain confidence in the financial system. Going forward, it will be important to press ahead
with the planned initiatives to enhance the supervision of financial conglomerates, establish a
legal framework to formalize the central bank’s responsibility for overall financial system
2

See Press Release 10/24: IMF Executive Board Approves US$1.27 Billion Stand-By Arrangement with Jamaica

3
stability, and strengthen capital adequacy standards for all deposit-taking institutions and
securities dealers. In the interim, Directors supported the temporary moratorium on new
licenses for securities dealers.
Directors agreed that monetary policy should remain focused on containing inflation and
promoting exchange rate flexibility. They saw some scope for reducing interest rates as
sovereign risk premiums decline following the debt exchange and as fiscal consolidation
progresses. They encouraged the authorities to limit foreign exchange intervention to smoothing
excessive volatility.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2009 Article IV Consultation with Jamaica is also available.

4
Jamaica: Selected Economic Indicators 1/
Projections
2010/11 2011/12

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

GDP, prices, and employment
Real GDP
Nominal GDP
Consumer price index (end of period)
Consumer price index (average)
Exchange rate (end of period, in J$/US$)
Exchange rate (average, J$/US$)
End-of-period REER (percent change, appreciation +)
Treasury Bill rate, end-of-period, in percent
Treasury Bill rate, period average, in percent
Unemployment rate (in percent)

1.2
12.2
11.2
14.8
65.3
63.2
4.0
13.0
13.0
11.6

3.2
14.2
8.0
7.4
67.6
66.3
-0.7
12.0
12.3
10.8

0.6
13.2
19.9
12.4
70.8
69.7
4.0
14.2
12.5
9.7

-1.6
12.3
12.4
20.2
88.0
76.3
-10.1
21.5
17.0
10.6

-3.5
3.3
12.2
9.0
…
…
…
…
…
…

0.6
11.5
7.3
11.2
…
…
…
…
…
…

1.9
10.3
7.0
7.1
…
…
…
…
…
…

Government operations
Budgetary revenue
Budgetary expenditure
Primary expenditure
Interest payments 2/

26.2
29.5
16.3
13.2

25.9
30.8
18.9
11.9

27.3
31.1
19.5
11.6

26.6
34.0
21.8
12.2

28.3
38.2
22.0
16.2

27.7
34.2
20.7
13.5

27.8
32.1
20.2
11.9

Budget balance
Of which: primary fiscal balance
Of which: underlying primary fiscal balance 3/

-3.3
9.9
…

-4.8
7.0
…

-3.8
7.8
…

-7.3
4.8
…

-10.0
6.2
5.2

-6.5
7.0
7.0

-4.3
7.7
7.7

Off-budget expenditure 4/

1.0

1.5

1.1

-0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

Net capital transfers to public entities 5/ 6/

…

…

0.0

0.6

-0.2

0.0

0.0

Public entities balance 5/
of which financed with loans and deposits drawdown

…
…

…
…

-3.4
-3.4

-2.5
-3.1

-2.8
-2.5

-1.0
-1.0

-0.6
-0.6

Overall fiscal balance

…

…

-8.2

-9.4

-12.7

-7.5

-4.9

Public debt 2/ 7/

119.9

116.5

113.5

124.0

140.0

140.0

135.6

External sector
Current account balance
Of which: exports of goods, f.o.b.
Of which: imports of goods, f.o.b.

-10.5
16.0
40.0

-9.7
17.9
42.3

-18.4
18.3
50.4

-18.0
17.0
50.0

-9.4
11.8
38.9

-8.8
12.0
39.0

-6.6
12.6
39.5

Net international reserves (in millions of US$)
Gross international reserves (In millions of US$)

2,078
2,373

2,329
2,614

2,083
2,106

1,629
1,664

1,378
2,051

1,078
2,151

1,325
2,635

1.7
6.9
-5.6
8.6

4.2
6.6
-3.5
10.8

0.9
11.6
2.7
12.5

-13.3
24.8
8.7
11.6

-6.1
5.2
5.1
-1.0

-7.7
19.2
2.2
11.5

7.6
6.0
2.7
13.7

Velocity (ratio of GDP to broad money)

3.1

3.2

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.4

3.3

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of J$)

714

815

923

1,037

1,071

1,194

1,317

Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which: credit to the central government
Broad money

Sources: Jamaican authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based partly on assumptions provided by the authorities. Fiscal years run from April 1 to March 31. Authorities'
budgets presented according to IMF definitions.
2/ Assumes liability management operations on January 1st 2010 involving the par-for-par exchange of bonds,
and targeting a 12.5 percent yield return on domestically-issued bonds and extension of maturities.
3/ Adjusts for one-off revenues in FY 2009/10.
4/ Includes debt issued to BOJ to cover its cash losses and, until 2007/08, debt related to off-budget projects financed
initially by the private sector.
5/ Assumes that any expansion of the PetroJam refinery, costing about 10 percent of GDP in cumulative terms, does not
involve government financing, neither direct nor guaranteed.
6/ Includes 20 selected public entities under rationalization or divestment plans and other public entities.
7/ Central government direct and guaranteed only, including PetroCaribe debt and proposed IMF disbursements.

Press Release No. 10/24
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 4, 2010

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves US$1.27 Billion Stand-By Arrangement with Jamaica
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today approved a 27-month
Stand-By Arrangement with Jamaica in the amount of SDR 820.5 million (about US$1.27
billion) to support the country’s economic reforms and help it cope with the consequences of
the global downturn. A disbursement of SDR 414.3 million (about US$ 640 million) will
become available to Jamaica immediately.
The key objectives of the arrangement are to support the Jamaican authorities’ ample reform
program to address deep-seated structural weaknesses in the country’s economy, increase its
growth potential, and make it less vulnerable to external shocks.
To achieve these goals, the program focuses on a three-pronged strategy:
1) An ambitious plan that puts public finances on a sustainable path that includes muchneeded public sector reform;
2) A debt strategy to lower exceptionally high interest costs and help address the problem of
the debt overhang , and raise the productivity of public spending;
3) Financial sector regulatory reform to reduce systemic risks.
The Jamaican authorities are already implementing many of these actions, which are
expected to improve the public sector fiscal balance by over 5 percent of GDP in FY 2010.
Among them, a debt exchange aimed at generating interest savings of at least 3 percent of
GDP and a 65 percent reduction in the amount of maturing debt over the next three years
have been successfully carried out, with an acceptance level of almost 95 percent of
bondholders. A tax package has already been enacted and is expected to produce an increase
in revenues of around 2 percent of GDP. Loss-making public entities are being divested.
At the same time, the government’s economic program is designed to ensure a significant
increase in social spending for targeted programs. Spending will increase by at least 25
percent (equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP) in the school feeding program and the cash
transfer Program of Advancement through Health and Education (PATH). The

2

administration will also be pursuing efforts to expand the social safety net to assist persons
below the poverty line who do not qualify for PATH assistance and improve their
employability.
Approval of the Stand-By Arrangement is expected to generate about US$1.1 billion in
funding from other international financial institutions. Part of the first disbursement will be
used to establish a Financial Stability Support Fund, which will also include funds from other
multilaterals and will help support the country’s financial sector.
Following the Executive board discussion, Mr. Takatoshi Kato, Deputy Managing Director
and Acting Chair, issued the following statement:
“Jamaica’s large debt burden has magnified the fallout of the global crisis by limiting the
scope for a counter-cyclical domestic policy response. Fundamental economic reforms are
needed to restore fiscal sustainability, safeguard economic and financial sector stability, and
enhance Jamaica’s growth potential. The ambitious economic program demonstrates that the
authorities are committed to meeting these challenges.
“The authorities are to be commended for the strong measures taken to maintain economic
stability. These include introducing a third tax package this fiscal year and extending the
public sector wage freeze for two years. The 2010/11 budget provides for increased social
spending while reducing recurrent expenditures. The government has successfully completed
a domestic debt exchange operation, which has contributed to a more equitable sharing of the
burden of the overall fiscal adjustment. The exchange has also struck an appropriate balance
in terms of delivering necessary cash flow savings while taking appropriate account of the
need to ensure financial sector stability.
“In addition to these near-term measures, the Jamaican authorities have committed to a
comprehensive agenda of structural reform to help address the root causes of the deep
economic imbalances. The swift passage of fiscal responsibility legislation and adoption of a
central Treasury management system are necessary to enhance budget control and bolster
fiscal transparency and accountability. Rationalization of the public sector, including through
compensation and employment reforms and the divestment of public entities, aims to secure
durable fiscal savings.
“The planned legislative and regulatory reforms will help reduce systemic risks to the
financial system and strengthen the overall resilience of the economy to shocks. Key
measures include the adoption of an omnibus banking law, an amendment to the Bank of
Jamaica Act, and reforms of deposit-taking institutions and the securities dealer sector,”
Mr. Kato said.

3

ANNEX
Recent Economic Developments
Jamaica has been strongly impacted by the global economic slowdown. Real GDP declined
by 1.6 percent in Fiscal Year (FY) 2008/09 (April 1-March 31), with economic conditions
deteriorating sharply in the second half of the year. During the current fiscal year, real GDP
contracted further, registering a decline of 3 percent during the first half of the year.
Bauxite and alumina production and exports fell by about 60 percent, while remittances—a
traditional source of balance of payments support—suffered a sharp decline. Tourism has
also been negatively affected, although it has proven to be far more resilient than in the rest
of the Caribbean.
In FY2009/10, the external current account deficit is expected to narrow from 18 percent of
GDP to 9.5 percent, as the contraction in imports exceeds by far that of exports. Inflation fell
steadily from 26.5 percent in August 2008 to 9 percent in November 2009, reflecting weak
domestic demand and a decline in global commodity prices from their mid-2008 peaks.
Government finances have deteriorated, constraining the authorities’ ability to respond to the
global shock with countercyclical policies. The public sector deficit is projected to reach
almost 13 percent of GDP in FY 2009/10. The interest bill rose by 38 percent, reflecting the
effects of the depreciation and a steep rise in interest rates. The deficit of public entities
remained large, at close to 3 percent of GDP. As a result of these combined shocks, concerns
about economic prospects and the sustainability of Jamaica’s debt have placed significant
pressure on the currency over the past year and a half.
Main Program Goals
Growth: Economic growth is projected to shift from a contraction of 3.5 percent in
FY2009/10 to an expansion of 0.5 percent in FY2010/11 and a further increase of 2 percent
thereafter.
Inflation: While one-off tax measures are expected to result in a temporary spike in inflation
to just over 12 percent by end FY2009/10, in the absence of strong demand or foreign
exchange market pressures, inflation is projected to fall to an average of 11 percent in
FY2010/11 and further to 6 percent over the medium term.
Balance of payments: The external current account deficit is projected to continue to narrow
gradually from 9.5 percent of GDP in FY2009/10 to 5 percent over the medium term, based
on the recent depreciation of the currency in real effective terms and the expected increase in
national saving as a result of fiscal consolidation.
Tax Reform: The organization of the tax administration and improving tax compliance is
expected to be modernized. The authorities are committed to implementing rapidly the
recommendations of a 2008 Fund Technical Assistance mission, including by unifying domestic
tax administration and enhancing compliance through streamlined administrative procedures

4

Public Sector Reforms: The organization of the public sector will be streamlined, with a
view to reducing the wage bill as a share of GDP. A committee has been appointed to review
the existing structure of the public sector which is characterized by many entities with
unclear or overlapping functions. The committee will present recommendations on a new
structure by December 2010.
Financial sector reforms: Vulnerabilities in the financial system will be addressed,
particularly the high exposure of securities dealers to government risk. The Jamaican
government is committed to improving financial sector companies’ ability to withstand
shocks, by enhancing capital adequacy and margin requirements. The Bank of Jamaica will
take explicit responsibility for overall financial system stability.
Jamaica has been a member of the IMF since February 1963 and has a total quota of SDR
273.5 million. For additional information on IMF and Jamaica see:
http://www.imf.org/external/country/JAM/index.htm

