© 2010 International Monetary Fund
February 23, 2010

2009

July 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/185
January 29, 2001

Nepal: 2010 Article IV Consultation and Request for Disbursement Under the Rapid
Credit Facility—Staff Report; Staff Supplements; Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Alternate Executive Director and Advisor for Nepal.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2010 Article IV Consultation with Nepal, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
March 8, 2010, with the officials of Nepal on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on May
14, 2010. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



A staff supplement on the joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis.



A staff supplement of May 25, 2010.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its May 28, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.



A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its May
28, 2010 discussion of the staff report that completed the review.



A statement by the Alternate Executive Director and Advisor for Nepal.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Nepal*
Selected Issues Paper
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
NEPAL
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Request for Disbursement Under the Rapid Credit Facility
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2010 Article IV Consultation with Nepal
Approved by Kalpana Kochhar and Christian Mumssen
May 14, 2010
Mission. A staff team—L. Papi (head), J. Yu, D. Nyberg (all APD), K. Ariyapruchya
(MCM), and A. Pitt (Resident Representative)—visited Kathmandu during February 24–
March 8, 2010. K. Kochhar (APD) joined the mission during February 27–March 2.
Ms. Vongpradhip and Mr. Thapa (both OED) also participated in the discussions.
Previous Fund advice. The 2008 Article IV consultation was discussed by the Board on
May 16, 2008. Directors commended the authorities for maintaining macroeconomic stability
over the past several years despite the civil conflict and political upheavals. Directors
encouraged the authorities to pursue a more active monetary policy and urged them to give
renewed impetus to strengthening financial sector supervision and regulatory enforcement to
maintain stability in the face of rapid banking sector growth. While fiscal policy has
remained prudent, monetary policy has been passive and financial sector regulation only
started to be tightened in late 2009.
Exchange rate regime. Nepal maintains a peg with the Indian rupee. Nepal has accepted the
obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. Staff is in the process of seeking the
information necessary to clarify the jurisdictional implications of certain foreign exchange
measures and a potential multiple currency practice.
Economics statistics. Generally adequate for surveillance, with scope for improvement, in
particular in the timeliness and coverage of fiscal data, the frequency and quality of national
accounts data, and in the balance of payments, compilation of remittances, and official and
private financial flows.
Consultation cycle. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Nepal will take
place on the standard 12-month cycle.
Rapid Credit Facility (RCF). Staff supports the authorities’ request for a disbursement
under the RCF in an amount equivalent to SDR 28.52 million (40 percent of quota) to help
address the economic impact of the global economic crisis.

2
Contents

Page

I. Staff Appraisal and Summary ..............................................................................................3
II. Context: Economic Challenges in the Midst of a Major Political Transition ......................5
III. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook: After Years of Macroeconomic
Stability, Risks are Rising ....................................................................................................6
IV. Policy Discussions: Managing External and Financial Sector Risks.................................10
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ............................................................................10
B. Financial Sector Reform................................................................................................14
C. Fiscal Policy ..................................................................................................................19
D. Structural Reform ..........................................................................................................22
E. Request for a Disbursement Under the Rapid Credit Facility .......................................22
F. Other Issues ..................................................................................................................24
Boxes
1. Nepal’s Remittances: Trends and Projections .....................................................................9
2. Exchange Rate Assessment................................................................................................12
3. Risks to Financial Stability ................................................................................................15
Figures
1. A Long Term Perspective ..................................................................................................25
2. Recent Developments ........................................................................................................26
3. Monetary and Financial Sector Developments ..................................................................27
4. Fiscal Sector Developments ...............................................................................................28
Tables
1. Millenium Development Goals, 1990–2008 ......................................................................29
2. Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2010/11..............................................................30
3. Summary of Government Operations, 2006/07–2010/11 ..................................................31
4. Reserve Money and Monetary Survey, 2006/07–2009/10 ................................................32
5. Balance of Payments, 2006/07–2014/15............................................................................33
6. Macroeconomic Framework, 2008/09–2014/15 ................................................................34
7. Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–2020......................................................35
Attachment
1. Letter of Intent ...................................................................................................................36

3
I. STAFF APPRAISAL AND SUMMARY
1.
Nepal is undergoing a major political transition. Relations among the main parties
remain contentious as thorny issues regarding the army integration and the form of the state remain
unresolved. Fresh elections will be held after the new constitution is approved, but the end-May
deadline for drafting the new statute is likely to be missed.
2.
After years of macroeconomic stability, the global crisis is having a substantial, albeit
somewhat delayed, impact on Nepal’s economy and exposing its structural weaknesses. The
exchange rate peg and prudent fiscal policy have been anchors of stability. High remittances have
resulted in rising reserves despite the lackluster export performance. Recently, however, reserves
have declined as exports fell, remittances softened, and imports soared, resulting in a liquidity
crunch.
3.
The outlook is challenging. Real GDP growth is expected to slow to 3 percent in 2009/10
from 4¾ percent in 2008/09, due to a poor monsoon, export declines, softer remittances, and
tighter monetary conditions. The current account is projected to shift to a 2 percent of GDP deficit,
with reserves at 5 months of imports by year-end. Growth is anticipated to strengthen in 2010/11
and the current account position to improve, but risks are on the downside and stem mainly from
weaker remittances, continued high imports, capital flight, heightened financial sector
vulnerabilities, and political instability.
4.
Although the Nepalese rupee appears modestly overvalued, maintaining the peg
should remain a key near-term policy objective. The real effective exchange rate is 15 percent
above its 10-year average. Standard methods of estimating exchange rate misalignment provide a
wide range of estimates of overvaluation, with the lower end being when remittances are included.
Nevertheless, the peg remains appropriate as remittances growth is expected to recover and import
growth to moderate, and the peg is needed to continue to underpin macroeconomic and financial
stability. Monetary policy needs to support the peg by maintaining short-term interest rates above
those of India and liquidity management should be strengthened. Over the medium term, a basket
that includes the Indian rupee as well as the dollar could be considered, as this would take into
account the sources of remittances.
5.
Risks in the financial sector are coming to a head and need to be addressed urgently.
Rapid credit growth and proliferation of institutions fed asset price booms, especially in real estate,
in an environment of weak supervision. Banks overextended themselves and their vulnerabilities
were exposed by the recent liquidity squeeze. Stress tests indicate high vulnerability to liquidity
and credit risks and financial institutions asset quality is likely to deteriorate. Financial institutions
other than commercial banks are even weaker.
6.
The NRB’s recent directives are welcome, but enforcement is crucial to their
effectiveness. The NRB needs to avoid diluting regulations and begin strictly enforcing them.
Supervision should be stepped up to detect deterioration in financial institutions’ soundness and
intervene them as needed. Emergency liquidity support must be consistent with the peg and
liquidity to individual institutions experiencing shortages should be provided at penalty rates or via

4
the bank rate window under heightened supervision. The amended Banks and Financial Institutions
Act should be passed to strengthen the bank resolution framework and the authorities should also
prepare contingency planning in case a systemic bank crisis were to develop. Savings and credit
cooperatives should be brought under regulatory oversight.
7.
Bank licensing policy needs to be tightened, banking sector consolidation incentivized,
and state-controlled bank reform tackled. The licensing moratorium should be maintained and
more stringent fit and proper criteria adopted. Consolidation should be encouraged, including by
raising minimum paid up capital requirements and facilitating the trading of promoter shares. The
authorities need to proceed with reforms and recapitalization of the state-controlled banks with
losses absorbed by existing shareholders.
8.
Maintaining fiscal discipline during the political transition has been a remarkable
achievement and although the debt reduction has created fiscal space, in the short run the
peg calls for containing domestic borrowing close to current levels. Fiscal policy has continued
to be broadly prudent and public debt has declined to 40 percent of GDP. This has created fiscal
space that could be used for much needed infrastructure, human capital, and the peace process
provided spending quality is ensured. But, in the short term, the worsening external position
requires that domestically financed deficits remain close to current levels.
9.
Tackling longstanding structural problems is essential to achieve high growth over the
medium term. The poor business climate, power shortages, inadequate infrastructure, weak
governance, and difficult labor relations remain major impediments to moving to a higher growth
path. Political stability and improved security are necessary conditions for progress in several of
these areas.
10.
Staff supports the authorities’ request for a disbursement under the Rapid Credit
Facility (RCF) to help address the impact of the global crisis. The crisis is having a substantial,
albeit somewhat delayed, impact, with a significant decline in exports, a sharp slowdown in
remittances, and a worsening of economic confidence. This has contributed to a large deterioration
in the current account balance and a decline in international reserves. The authorities are cognizant
that urgent policy actions are needed to address rising external and financial sector risks, the
interaction of which makes stabilizing reserves a top priority. The measures taken so far and the
authorities’ policy commitments under the RCF appropriately address the impact of the shocks.
Rapid Fund support would help cushion the shock, boost confidence, and provide policy support
during the political transition. The RCF could also serve as a bridge to a program with upper credit
tranche conditionality that could support deeper reforms to address Nepal’s entrenched structural
problems. Nepal has adequate capacity to repay the Fund, and its risk of debt distress is moderate.
The request is for access of 40 percent of quota (SDR 28.52 million), which is below the ceiling of
50 percent of quota permissible under the shocks window and consistent with Nepal’s current
balance of payment needs.
11.
Staff is in the process of seeking the information necessary to clarify the jurisdictional
implications of certain foreign exchange measures and a potential multiple currency practice.

5
II. CONTEXT: ECONOMIC CHALLENGES IN THE MIDST OF A MAJOR POLITICAL TRANSITION
12.
Four years after the end of the conflict, Nepal’s politics remain polarized. Constituent
Assembly elections were held in April 2008 in which the Unified Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) emerged as the clear winner with nearly 40 percent of the seats. The first meeting of the
Assembly abolished the monarchy and established the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal.
Despite the successful election, the political situation remained tense and the Maoist-led coalition
lasted less than a year due to disagreements about the integration of Maoist combatants in the army.
In June 2009, a 22-party coalition led by the United Marxist-Leninist Party (UML) took office
without support of the Maoists. Relations among major parties remain contentious as thorny issues
relating to army integration and the form of the state, including the federalist structure, remain
unresolved. Fresh elections will be held once the new constitution is ready, likely not before late
2010.
Per Capita GDP Growth vs. Per Capita GDP
14

Per Capita GDP Growth

13.
Nepal is one of the poorest
countries in Asia, although social
indicators have recently improved.
Political instability, poor governance, and
supply bottlenecks, notably related to
infrastructure and labor relations, have
impeded economic growth (Figure 1).
Although Nepal’s per capita income and
its human development index still lags
regional comparators, the country has
made rapid improvements in health and
education indicators and reduced poverty
significantly in recent years, driven by
rising remittance inflows.

12

Myanmar

10

Sierra Leone
Cambodia
Tajikistan
Chad
Mozambique
Ethiopia
Rwanda
Tanzania
Uganda
Lao, P.D.R.
Bangladesh
Burkina Faso
Ghana
Gambia, the
Niger
Mali
Benin
Timor-Leste
Malawi
Madagascar
Kenya
Congo, D.R.
Lesotho
Nepal
Guinea
Burundi
Comoros
Guinea-Bissau
Togo
C.A.R.
Haiti
Eritrea

8

6

4

2

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

GDP Per Capita

Poverty and Social Indicators
Nepal

SAARC 1/

2000

2008 2/

2000

2008 2/

Population below poverty line (%)
GNI per capita, Atlas method US$

41.8 1/
220.0

30.9 1/
400.0

34.3 1/
751.4

28.6 1/
1468.6

Gross primary enrollment
Human development index

116.7
0.5

123.9
0.6

104.0
0.6

105.9
0.6

62.9

43.1

58.8

45.2

Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)

Sources: Various U.N. Publications; World Bank, World Development Indicators.
1/ South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), including Bhutan,
Bangladesh, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Afghanistan is not
included.
2/ As latest available years.

600

6
14.
Supported by remittance inflows, macroeconomic stability has been broadly
maintained in recent years, but the global crisis is having a delayed and substantial impact.
Real growth has averaged around 4 percent since the end of the conflict. The exchange rate peg to
the Indian rupee has been instrumental in keeping inflation broadly in line with price developments
in India. The fiscal stance has been cautious and public debt reduced to 40 percent of GDP. Strong
remittance inflows in recent years—currently 21 percent of GDP, the highest in the region—have
resulted in current account surpluses and allowed the build-up of reserves. At the same time,
financial sector vulnerabilities have been growing as loose monetary conditions, combined with a
fast-growing financial sector, contributed to credit and asset price booms. Recently, though, weaker
remittances and a widening trade deficit have led to a significant decline in international reserves.
Inflow of Remittances, 2002-2009
2002 2005 2008
(in percent of GDP)
South Asia 1/
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Philippines

2008
(in US$bn)

Annual change in $-value (in percent)
2006-08 (average) Q/Q(-4) Through

5.9
5.7
3.3
11.0
4.8
4.5

7.0
7.0
3.0
13.8
3.9
7.1

9.1
11.0
4.2
19.5
4.2
6.5

72.4
9.0
51.3
2.5
7.0
2.6

24
28
29
30
18
14

20
30
4
11
25
30

Dec-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
Nov-09

9.0

10.8

9.7

16.4

15

9

Nov-09

Sources: IMF (BOP Yearbook; World Economic Outlook); Country authorities;
World Bank remittances database-March 2009; CEIC Data Co. Ltd.

III. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK: AFTER YEARS OF MACROECONOMIC
STABILITY, RISKS ARE RISING
15.
The initial impact of the global crisis on Nepal had been limited, but the fall in exports
and the recent sharp slowdown in remittances have had a substantial adverse effect.1 After a
limited impact in 2008/09, the crisis began to affect Nepal substantially in the first half of 2009/10.2


Remittances. As demand for workers fell owing to the crisis, the number of Nepalese
workers leaving to work abroad declined by 12 percent in 2009 and the growth of remittances
decelerated sharply to 17 percent in the first half of 2009/10 from 31 percent in the previous

1

Transmission mechanisms from the global crisis seem to vary considerably across countries. While some advanced
countries suffered a financial/banking crisis, most developing countries were primarily hit by an external demand effect,
although some were also hit by terms-of-trade and to a lesser extent capital flows effects. See “Effects of the global
financial crisis on medium and long-run growth in low-income countries,” by A. Berg et al., forthcoming IMF
manuscript.

2

The fiscal year starts in mid-July.

7
year. This effect materialized with a significant delay because employment fell only after the
production decline and because migrants typically received a lump-sum payment before
termination of employment.


Trade balance. Exports declined by 14 percent in the first half of 2009/10 as a result of lower
demand and the appreciation of the Indian rupee: although exports to India declined by
6 percent, exports to other countries shrank by 26 percent. At the same time, imports soared
by 46 percent—with gold almost tripling.3 Most of the increase in imports can be attributed to
entrenched expectations of continued strong remittance growth in line with recent years and to
gold imports, which likely resulted from deteriorating confidence. The trade deficit widened
to 28 percent of GDP.



Reserves. These developments, combined with reported capital flight, reduced international
reserves by 13 percent from the July 2009 peak to US$2.5 billion (5 months of imports) in
March 2010 (Figures 2 and 3).

16.
Growth is slowing. A poor monsoon, falling exports, and decelerating remittance growth
suggest activity is weakening compared to an estimated growth of 4¾ percent in 2008/09. Monetary
conditions have tightened and the fiscal impulse is small. In the first half of 2009/10, revenue grew
34 percent over the same period in the previous year, in excess of already ambitious budget targets,
driven primarily by import-related taxes and duties. Current spending rose by over 40 percent, but
slow capital project implementation is keeping the overall deficit to levels only slightly higher than
last year (Figure 4).
17.
Inflation has been close to that of India. Up to 2007/08, Nepal’s inflation broadly mirrored
India’s price developments. In 2008/09, however, the inflation rate in Nepal at 13.2 percent was
higher than India’s, driven primarily by loose monetary conditions. More recently, at 11.8 percent
(y/y) in January 2010, inflation is converging with India’s, but pressures remain high as India’s
inflation is on the rise.
18.
After years of abundant liquidity, the recent reserve decline and ensuing liquidity
squeeze have exposed financial sector weaknesses. Rapid credit growth persisted up to March
2010 (30 percent y/y) fuelling sharp increases in real estate and stock market prices. Banks
overextended themselves and credit-to-deposit (CD) ratios climbed to nearly 90 percent by January
2010, with several banks above 100 percent. Liquidity shortages, however, started emerging in
December 2009 as net foreign assets declined. Broad money growth decelerated to 20 percent (y/y)
3

In response to rapidly rising gold imports, in January 2010, the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) imposed a 40 percent margin
requirement on letters of credit and guarantees used to finance gold imports. This was followed by restrictions on the
quantity of gold that can be imported and similar measures applied to silver imports. On April 2, 2010, to protect the
balance payments position, the NRB limited the use of foreign exchange for private travel to $2000 which can be
obtained only twice a year compared to an unlimited number of times previously. Staff is examining whether this
constitutes an exchange restriction.

8
in March 2010 from 28 percent in September 2009. As a result, interbank rates rose to 15 percent in
January from 2 percent in September, until NRB liquidity injections reduced rates to about
9 percent. In response to the tighter liquidity conditions, commercial banks have reportedly reduced
loan disbursements markedly, increased deposit and lending rates, and real estate transactions have
plummeted. The stock market, which is dominated by financial institutions, has fallen 60 percent
from its September 2008 peak and has not recovered in synch with other countries.
19.
The near-term outlook is challenging and risks are high. The year 2009/10 is likely to see
weaker economic activity and a sizeable current account deficit for the first time since 1998/99. The
economy is expected to recover the following year and the current account position to improve.
Weak remittances and exports, high imports, heightened financial sector vulnerabilities, and the
unsettled political environment pose significant risks to this outlook.

Activity is set to remain sluggish in 2009/10. A deficient monsoon will result in a
poor harvest.4 Soft remittances and exports and tighter monetary conditions will likely
constrain overall growth to about 3 percent. Growth is expected to strengthen to about
4 percent in 2010/11 as employment conditions for migrants in host countries improve and
external demand for Nepalese exports recovers.

Balance of payments. The current account balance is projected to record a deficit of
2 percent of GDP as remittances are estimated to increase by only 9 percent in 2009/10
reflecting the slowdown in the Gulf region and Malaysia before recovering in 2010/11 in line
with host country non-oil GDP growth (Box 1). Despite an expected moderation in the rest of
the year, imports are projected to grow by 30 percent, while exports are anticipated to decline
by 11 percent. External grants are projected to increase temporarily in the near term as donors
step up their commitments to support the peace process. Reserves are projected to remain at
around 5 months of imports, as a return of confidence brought about by strengthened policies
and Fund support is anticipated to reverse capital outflows.

Inflation is projected to gradually converge with India’s CPI developments, averaging
12 percent in 2009/10 and 8 percent in 2010/11.
20.
Tackling long-standing structural problems is essential to achieve high growth over the
medium term. Over the past decade, progress on structural reform has been held back by the
fragile political circumstances. Looking ahead, political stability and improved security are
necessary for progress on structural reforms to improve the business climate and external
competitiveness and diversify the economy. With Nepal located between two of the fastest growing
economies in the world, steady progress on the political front, easing of supply-side constraints, and
the development of Nepal’s vast hydropower potential could lift growth to a higher path. However,
assuming incremental progress on reforms, growth is projected to rise only slowly over the medium
term, reaching 4¾ percent by 2014/15.
4

Agriculture accounts for a third of GDP.

9
Box 1. Nepal’s Remittances: Trends and Projections
Remittances have become Nepal’s most important source of
foreign exchange and have supported domestic demand. By the
end of 2008/09, remittances at 21 percent of GDP were three
times exports and covered two thirds of imports. Remittances
have sustained consumption and to a lesser extent investment.
Over 80 percent of remittances come from the Gulf countries
(GCCs) and Malaysia: migrants are employed mainly as
construction workers, security guards, drivers and cooks, etc.
Estimates of the number of migrants to India vary widely, but
remittances from India are less than 15 percent of the total.
Nepal’s remittances began to slow in the second half of 2009.
The outflow of workers started declining in early 2009, and
was down by 12 percent in 2009, although it picked up
modestly in recent months. These trends suggest that the
delayed impact of the global crisis results from the fact that
remittances are linked to the employment cycle in host
countries, which lags the production cycle. The recent pickup in
outflow workers reflected increased demand from GCCs and
Malaysia. Moreover, the government reached employment
agreements with a few countries (Japan and Korea for instance)
recently, which should boost remittances in the second half of
2010.
The deceleration in remittances is expected to continue in the
months ahead. Remittances and the stock of migrant workers
lagged by 1 year are highly correlated. 5 Hence, remittance
growth in 2009/10 is projected to slow to 9 percent from
31 percent in 2008/09, owing to the slower buildup in the stock
of migrants abroad.
Other low-income countries (LICs) are also experiencing similar
trends. Though less severe than exports, remittance flows to
LICs have dropped significantly owing to the impact of the
global recession, and are projected to recover somewhat but
remain below pre-crisis levels in 2010. 6 Remittances to South
5

100%

Figure 1. Outflow of Migrant Workers to GCC
Countries and Malaysia, 2000-09

75%
50%
25%
0%
Malaysia
Bahrain
Saudi Arabia

Oman
UAE

Kuwait
Qatar

Figure 2: Gross outflow of workers
(12-month percentage change in 3mma)

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60

Philippines
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Nepal
Bangladesh

Figure 3. Forecast of LIC Remittance Index
(2007=100)
Post-crisis forecast

125

Pre-crisis forecast
115

105

95
2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 4. Non-oil GDP Growth of GCC Countries,
2001-2015 (in percent)
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

The stock of migrants is estimated from outflow data.
See The Implications of the Global Financial Crisis for Low-Income Countries—An Update, IMF, 2009; and Migration
and Development Brief, No. 11, World Bank, 2009.

6

10
Asia may hold up better than in other regions due to the strong connection with Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) countries.
A staff study suggests that Nepal’s remittances could grow by 10–12 percent annually over the medium term. 7
The most important determinant of remittances is the non-oil GDP of GCC countries besides the stock of
migrants. The real effective exchange rate (RER), though not significant, has a negative coefficient, implying
that a real appreciation would deter remittances. GCC countries’ non-oil GDP growth is projected to recover to
5½ percent over the medium term, but remain below its average of 7 percent preceding the global crisis. In
addition, the RER has been appreciating in the past few years. Hence, Nepal’s remittances are estimated to
grow moderately by 10–12 percent annually in 2010/11–2014/15.

Authorities’ Views
21.
The authorities are slightly more optimistic about the outlook for 2009/10. They recently
lowered growth projections to below 4 percent from 5½ percent, mainly reflecting the poor harvest
but anticipating solid growth in industry and services. The authorities agree that remittances will be
soft in 2009/10, but expect them to improve in coming months as more migrants are leaving and the
government has negotiated new agreements with Saudi Arabia and Malaysia.
22.
Government officials agree that progress on structural reform is essential to move to a
higher growth path over the medium term. They are cognizant of the need to improve the business
climate, but stress that the political transition must progress before a comprehensive structural reform
agenda can be adopted.
IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS: MANAGING EXTERNAL AND FINANCIAL SECTOR RISKS
The consultation focused on (i) maintaining continued macroeconomic stability in the context of a
deteriorating external position and how Fund support could contribute to this end; and (ii) managing
financial sector risks and reducing vulnerabilities.
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
23.
The exchange rate peg to the Indian rupee has provided an anchor for macroeconomic
stability. This arrangement, in place since 1993 at the current level, has fostered increasing
integration between the two countries. The peg has been instrumental in anchoring inflation broadly
in line with price developments in India during a period of significant political turmoil and focusing
macroeconomic policies on supporting the peg.
24.
The Nepali rupee appears modestly overvalued. The real effective exchange rate is
15 percent above its 10-year average, suggesting some loss of competitiveness as evidenced by a
7

See Almekinders, G., Maslova, S., and Z. Abenjola, 2009, Bangladesh: Selected Issues, IMF Staff Country Report No.
10/56 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

11
shrinking share of world exports. The overall trade deficit has widened from 11 percent in 2001/02 to
21½ percent of GDP in 2008/09, stemming from both a decline in exports and an increase in imports.
In assessing Nepal’s exchange rate, however, the analysis must extend beyond the narrow trade
deficit, which has been offset by growing remittances. Standard methods of estimating exchange rate
alignment suggest overvaluation, but when remittances are taken into account the degree of
overvaluation becomes modest (Box 2).
25.
In the current precarious political and economic climate, maintaining the peg should
remain a key short-term policy objective. The peg remains appropriate, given that remittances
growth is expected to recover, albeit not to past years’ levels, and import growth should moderate in
response to recent measures and an anticipated slowdown in credit expansion. Moreover, abandoning
the peg now could undermine confidence, leading to capital flight and lower bank deposits. Nepal
also faces the challenges of India’s tightening monetary policy and an appreciating Indian rupee.
Hence, if Nepal’s external position does not improve, pressure on reserves may continue. To maintain
adequate reserve coverage, the authorities are considering measures to curb imports of consumption
goods. Such measures, however, are distortionary and tightening import restrictions is not a substitute
for sound macroeconomic policies to maintain external stability. In a worst-case scenario, reserves
should not be allowed to fall below critical levels as re-pegging otherwise would become impossible.
While a peg would likely remain the best nominal anchor even over the medium term, the widening
productivity differential with India suggests that a basket including the Indian rupee and the dollar to
take into account migrants’ destinations could be considered. Reestablishing a credible new nominal
anchor is often difficult, but the chances of a successful transition increases with an orderly and wellplanned adoption of a new regime.8
26.
Monetary policy needs to support the peg, but liquidity management should avoid
abrupt fluctuations in interest rates. The NRB’s liquidity management has been passive,
contributing to rapid credit growth and inflation pressures: up to 2008/09 as reserves soared liquidity
was largely left unsterilized, while in recent months liquidity dried up as reserves declined. While
this is partly unavoidable given the peg, a more active liquidity management is warranted. In the
upswing greater sterilization would have been desirable, while earlier liquidity injections would
have been appropriate when liquidity tightened. Monetary policy needs to focus on short-term rates
(instead of bank’s excess reserves), which should be above those of India, with the premium
depending on the balance of payments position and confidence. At present, monetary policy should
remain tight to support the exchange rate and contain credit growth, and the NRB’s general liquidity
provision (via repos) should be consistent with the peg. Individual banks’ temporary liquidity needs
should be met at penalty rates through the Standard Lending Facility (SLF), while liquidity needs of
banks without standard collateral should be addressed through the bank rate window under

8

See for example: Eichengreen et al. (1998) “Exit strategies: policy options for countries seeking greater exchange rate
flexibility” IMF Occasional Paper No. 168, Washington DC, and Duttagupta et al. (2004) “From fixed to float:
operational aspects of moving toward exchange rate flexibility,” IMF Working Paper 04/126.

12
Box 2. Nepal—Exchange Rate Assessment
REER. Nepal’s real effective exchange rate (REER)
began appreciating from 2005: it has risen 21 percent
since then and is 15 percent higher than its 10-year
average. The bilateral RER with India has appreciated
by 3 percent in the same period, with a greater
deterioration since 2008.

Ne pal: Re al Effe ctive Exchange Rate ,
1993-2009
12 0
115

10 ye a r
a ve ra ge

110
10 5
10 0
95
90
85
80

Real Ef f ective Exchange Rate and Current Account
35

115

Remittances, in % of GDP (LHS)

30

Trade deficit, in % of GDP (LHS)

25

Real Effective Exchange Rate (RHS)

110

Current account balance, in % of GDP (LHS)

105

20
15

100

10

95

5

90

0
85

-5
-10
2007/08

2005/06

2003/04

2001/02

1999/00

1997/98

1995/96

1993/94

1991/92

80
1989/90

Current Account. The trade deficit averaged
11 percent of GDP in 2000–04, but started widening in
2005. Nepal’s export share in the world exports has
trended down partly due to the expiration of the multifiber agreement. Imports have risen, partly financed
by remittances and credit expansion. Remittances,
though, have more than compensated the widening
trade deficit, growing from 9 percent of GDP in 2000
to 21 percent in 2009 and yielding current account
surpluses in 1998/99–2008/09.9 But, soft remittances
as a result of the global recession and soaring imports
are likely to push the current account into a deficit in
2009/10.

Reserves. With the capital and financial account being small, reserves reached a peak of US$ 2.9
billion and 6 months of imports in July 2009, before dropping to US$2.5 billion and 5 months of
imports in January 2010.
Econometric approaches. Different methodologies produce a wide range of estimates, but all point
to some overvaluation of the Nepalese rupee. Of course, standard caveats apply.


9

Augmented PPP. According to the augmented PPP approach, which focuses solely on trade
competitiveness, the degree of exchange rate misalignment is estimated by comparing prices
and accounting for differentials in per capita GDP across countries. Reflecting the substantial
inflation differential with the United States, Nepal’s bilateral real exchange rate vis-à-vis the
US dollar appreciated by 16 percent from 2005 to end-2008/09. Meanwhile, Nepal’s real per
capita GDP grew by no more than 10 percent, compared to over 20 percent in India—Nepal’s
main trading partner. Based on a cross country regression of prices on income levels using the

The year 2006/07 was the only exception when the current account was -0.1 percent of GDP because of a sharp increase
in imports.

13
International Comparison Program (ICP) database for 146 countries, Nepal’s price level is
19 percent higher than what is should be given the income level.


External sustainability (ES). Using elasticities calculated by Tokarick (2009), the ES–based
estimate shows that the Nepalese rupee would have to depreciate by 7 percent to stabilize the
level of international investment position over the medium term.



Equilibrium real exchange rate. The ERER approach is based on a panel regression of the
real effective exchange rate on fundamentals— terms of trade, relative productivity, relative
government consumption—as well as remittance flows, which are found to be significant.10
The estimations show that Nepal’s REER is overvalued by about 8 percent.



Macro balance approach. Nepal’s current account norm is a deficit of 1.8 percent of GDP,
estimated including standard variables and remittances. Using the macro balance approach
and using the standard CGER elasticity of 4.3 percent, the currency is 9.5 percent overvalued.
However, using the Nepal-specific trade elasticity (32.7%) based on Tokarick (2009) points to
only 1 percent overvaluation. The latter elasticity takes into account (i) the composition of
Nepal's exports and imports; (ii) incomplete pass through of changes in exchange rates and
international prices to import and export prices; and (iii) Nepal’s price-taking behavior on
international markets.

heightened NRB oversight and conditionality and limited to solvent institutions. Clarifying
modalities of access to the bank rate window would be useful.
Authorities’ Views
27.
The authorities are strongly committed to maintaining the current peg. They view the
exchange rate peg as fundamental to economic stability and will take additional measures to stem
capital flight and import growth if pressure on reserves continues. In a medium-term perspective, the
authorities are aware of the widening productivity differential with India and the tension this places
on the fixed exchange rate regime. However, they expect continued labor mobility and remittance
inflows to offset the loss of competitiveness.
28.
The NRB views the current liquidity situation as temporary and expects it to ease soon.
Central bank officials anticipate the liquidity situation to normalize as remittance growth is
recovering and government spending is expected to increase in the last quarter of the fiscal year. The
NRB also notes that banks are reluctant to access the bank rate window owing to reputational risks.
Hence, the authorities had felt appropriate injecting liquidity via repos during the December-January
liquidity squeeze with interbank lending distributing the funds to the institutions in need. They noted
10

See External competitiveness and the real exchange rate in Bangladesh, Almekinders and Maslova (2009).

14
that no tiering had been observed in the interbank market, suggesting that banks were deemed sound.
Going forward, as stated in the attached letter of intent, the authorities are committed to addressing
individual banks’ liquidity needs through the supplementary liquidity facility. Since the end of the
mission, the authorities introduced measures to lengthen the maturity of repos, a new refinancing
facility for the export, tourism, and power sectors, and allowed banks to count call deposits toward
the statutory liquidity requirement.
B. Financial Sector Reform
29.
Nepal’s financial sector has grown very rapidly in recent years and strained the NRB’s
supervisory capacity (Box 3). Some of the growth in the financial sector reflects a natural
deepening of the financial system in Nepal. However, the rapid proliferation of banking sector
licenses and credit expansion has coincided with sharp rises in real estate and stock prices. In this
context, international experience suggests that rapid credit growth often precedes real estate price
busts. The proliferation of bank and finance companies has strained NRB’s supervisory capacity: the
enforcement of prudential standards is uneven and regulatory forbearance common. The two statecontrolled banks, accounting for 1/5 of system assets, continue to operate with negative capital.
30.
Stress tests indicate high vulnerability to credit and liquidity risks (Box 3). Nearly all
banks would be below the minimum capital adequacy ratio (CAR) if the largest borrower defaulted.
Reportedly, large borrowers are highly leveraged and engage in multiple banking. A 30 percent fall
in real estate prices could increase private banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs) by more than
20 percentage points as the majority of these loans were issued in the past two years at inflated
prices: the capital of the majority of private banks would fall below the minimum CAR. Banks’
liquidity positions are vulnerable to standard shocks: five to nine banks would become illiquid
within three to five days of deposit withdrawals. In a stress scenario, these shocks are likely to be
highly correlated and reinforce each other.
31.
Systemic risks in the financial sector are coming to a head. Following lax lending
standards and reportedly prevalent ever-greening, tighter liquidity, high interest rates, and a
standstill in real estate transactions will likely lead to rising loan defaults. Risks are exacerbated by
poor governance and transparency, and the pledging of promoters’ shares, which diminishes banks’
fresh capital and leads to excessive risk taking because promoters have little to lose. Although data
are scarce, financial institutions other than commercial banks are generally considered even weaker
than class-A banks. Distress in some financial institutions could trigger deposit runs, which would
spread quickly in the absence of a decisive policy response. Finally, if credit seizes up, a systemic
banking crisis may follow, while the peg will constrain the NRB’s ability to provide liquidity. In this
context, maintaining adequate NRB reserves would help support confidence in the financial system
and a turnaround in the external position would easy banks’ liquidity problems.

15
Box 3. Nepal: Risks to Financial Stability11

Although Nepal’s key financial soundness indicators on overall appear sound and compare well
internationally, financial stability appears to be at a turning point. The CAR is low in Nepal
because of the undercapitalization of the state controlled banks, but private banks have CARs above
12 percent. The profitability of banks is high reflecting the credit and asset price booms of the past 5
years. Financial soundness indicators, however, are lagging indicators and the impact of a correction
in asset prices or a credit crunch on banks’ balance sheets has yet to be reflected on them. At the
same time, there are indications that real estate transactions have declined substantially and prices
have started to fall in some locations. In addition, the recent liquidity crunch has shown the system’s
vulnerability to tighter liquidity conditions, as CD ratios have climbed since July 2009 and banks can
also pledge the securities they hold to satisfy the statutory liquidity requirement. Finally, a confidence
crisis could spread quickly as financial institutions’ business models are very similar.
Selected Financial Soundness Indicators, 2009 1/

Capital adequacy ratio
Nonperforming loans (%)
Bank provisions to NPLs
Return on assets
Liquid assets to total assets
Loan/deposit ratio

Nepal

Bangladesh

Cambodia

India

Thailand

Vietnam

5.6
3.4
152.9
2.3
29.1
74.5

10.1
11.2
50.1
1.3
n.a
n.a

25.6
2.7
n.a
3.1
38.6
85.5

13.2
2.4
52.6
1.1
n.a
73.9

14.2
5.8
80.0
1.0
n.a
102.7

8.2
3.0
81.7
n.a
13.5
89

Sources: Authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Cambodia, Bangladesh, Thailand, Vietnam data, 2008.

Regulatory gaps and forbearance have contributed to an environment of excessive risk-taking.
In contrast to international best practice, Nepalese bank promoters can pledge bank shares as
collateral to obtain loans. Such so-called margin lending diminishes “skin in the game,” depletes
banks’ fresh capital, and threatens the stability of Nepal’s financial system. Currently, there are 10
private commercial banks in which 20–90 percent of promoter shares are pledged. Regulatory
forbearance such as the unresolved status of the two under-capitalized state banks, postponements in
the applicability of the new banks’ minimum paid up capital and the new single borrower’s limit,
fosters moral hazard particularly when risks to financial stability are high.
Supervisory blind spots in the non-banking sector pose a risk to overall financial stability. The
non-banking sector, consisting of development banks, finance companies, micro-credit development
banks, saving and credit cooperatives, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), accounts for
11

See Selected Issues Paper, An Analysis of Systemic Risks in Nepal’s Banking Sector in the Wake of the Global Crisis

16
about 17 percent of the financial system. Cooperatives and NGOs are required to be licensed and
regulated by the NRB but many are not. Currently 16 cooperatives are licensed and an estimated
3,200 are not. A number of large cooperatives were found to have inadequate loan loss provisioning
and, possibly, fraud. Reportedly, many cooperatives are funded by commercial bank promoters. A
crisis in the non-banking sector could quickly spill over into the banking sector.
Stress tests suggest that commercial banks are more vulnerable to asset quality and liquidity
shocks than exchange rate and interest shocks.


A 30 percent fall in real estate prices is estimated to increase banks’ non-performing loans
(NPLs) by more than 20 percentage points and reduce the capital of 14 private banks below
the minimum CAR. Although banks’ direct exposure to real estate and housing loans is not
particularly high at about 20 percent as of January 2010, loan classification appears to have
some gaps and banks’ total exposure to real estate, including loans secured by land and
buildings, is approximately 70 percent. Anecdotes suggest that the price of real estate has
quintupled in the Kathmandu area in the last several years. Credit growth to the real estate
sector more than doubled in 2009. In addition, the majority of loans are estimated to have
been issued in the past two years at inflated real estate collateral value.



Concentration risk is high. A default of the largest borrower would result in the most banks
falling failing to meet their minimum CAR. A default of the three to five largest borrowers
would result in the insolvency of many banks. Reportedly, large borrowers are highly
leveraged and borrow from several banks: it is unclear whether the same collateral is pledged
for multiple loans.



Banks’ liquidity positions are vulnerable to standard shocks. Five to nine banks would
become illiquid within 3 to 5 days of deposit withdrawals at a daily rate of 8–10 percent. A
stronger shock of 15 percent would result in the majority of banks becoming illiquid.



Banks’ balance sheets are resilient to the direct effects of an exchange rate shock (vis-à-vis
the US dollar) due to the low level of dollarization.



The impact of an interest shock would also be limited. The impact of a 300 bps increase in
interest rates on CAR is -0.4 percentage points for all banks due to its modest effect on the net
interest income on private banks given that loans can be repriced quickly by banks, while a
substantial portion of deposits are at 1 year fixed rates.



Risks are concentrated. Combined shocks to the interest rate, exchange rate, and asset quality
shows that risks are concentrated in two private banks. In an environment of tightened
liquidity, rising interest rates and declining asset quality, risks are likely to have high
correlation.

International experience and Nepal’s macroeconomic indicators suggest that the risk of a costly
real estate bust and subsequent financial crisis is significant. International experience suggests

17
that large deviations in the ratios of credit, the current account, and investment to GDP often precede
real estate price busts.12 Strong growth in the
15
Figure 1. Credit/GDP Growth in Nepal and Other Countries Before and
During High-Cost and Other House Price Busts, 1985-2008 (t=1 denotes first
shares of credit and investment to GDP in Nepal
quarter of bust)
are consistent with patterns observed in the run-up 10
to a housing price bust and subsequent output loss.
5
In addition, the current account has deteriorated
markedly this year. Finally, given that most loans
0
are collateralized with real estate and that Nepal’s
financial sector is large compared to the size of the -5
High-cost busts
Other busts
Nepal (2006-2008)
economy (total banking assets are 56 percent of
GDP), the risk of a housing price bust with a large -10
Source: Authorities; and IMF staff calculations
subsequent output loss is significant.
-12 -11 -10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

32.
The NRB recently issued a set of prudential measures aimed at containing credit and
liquidity risks in the banking sector:


Licensing policy. In July 2009, the NRB imposed a moratorium on bank license applications
while the licensing policy is being reviewed. This moratorium was lifted in April 2010 for
microfinance banks (class D) and eased for development banks (class B), with the aim to
promote banking service provision in rural areas.



Single borrower and real estate loan exposure limits. Single borrower limits will be lowered
to 25 percent of capital from 50 percent initially by July 2010, but the deadline was later
moved to January 2011. Banks are required to gradually lower exposure to real estate loans
(real estate and housing) to 25 (40) percent of total loans by end of 2009/10. Both limits will
be lowered by 10 percentage points by end-2011/12 and by an additional 5 percentage points
by end-2012/13. Loans above the limit will be penalized by provisioning on the basis of a risk
weight of 150 percent.



Loan-to-value limit. Banks are limited to issuing loans of no more than 60 percent of fair
market value of collateral or project.



Credit-to-deposit ratio limit. Each bank’s credit-to-deposit ratio is not to exceed 95 percent
by end of 2009/10, 85 percent by end of 2010/11 and 80 percent by end-2011/12.



Bank restructuring. The NRB has begun liquidation of Nepal Development Bank (NDB) after
a lengthy court approval. The NRB has also completed the restructuring of the Nepal
Bangladesh Bank (NBB), but has restored the equity of the anchor investors, albeit diluted.

12

See for example “Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations,” World Economic Outlook (IMF
October 2009).

18
33.
These prudential measures are welcome, but enforcement is crucial for effectiveness.
The loan-to-value limit hinges on realistic valuations and the real estate exposure restrictions on
correct classification. Lower credit-to-deposit ratios are appropriate,13 but if they were to prove too
stringent because overall deposit growth slows substantially, bank-by-bank time bound action plans
would become necessary; failure to comply with such plans should be penalized.
34.

The authorities need to act urgently to safeguard financial stability. Key steps include:



The solvency and liquidity risks of banks should be thoroughly assessed. Stress tests can
help identify vulnerable institutions and prioritize intensified supervision. The NRB should be
provided with adequate resources for this task, but in the short run, supervision could be
assisted by international organizations or independent qualified firms. Corrective action
should be promptly applied.



The NRB’s credibility must be strengthened. The deferral of the dates of applicability of
new banks’ minimum paid up capital and of the new single borrower’s limit, and the return of
the NBB to original shareholders are regrettable. Further lapses in supervisory discipline and
dilution of regulations will undermine the NRB’s supervisory effectiveness at a time when
strong credibility is needed to curb excessive risk-taking in the financial sector. The NRB
needs to be backed at the highest political level and have strong and stable leadership.



Additional measures. The Prompt Correction Action framework should have greater
automaticity in triggering action by decreasing MOF discretion and be strictly implemented.
Pledging of promoters’ shares should be banned and a plan devised to phase out existing
pledges. The postponement of the minimum paid up capital for new banks should be reversed.
Savings and credit cooperatives should be brought under regulatory oversight.

35.
Stepping up contingency planning is imperative. Key elements of crisis preparedness
include a clear framework for emergency liquidity support using existing tools but along the lines
advocated in paragraph 14, strengthening the bank resolution framework, and developing an action
plan for crisis management. The amended Banks and Financial Institutions Act (BAFIA), if
approved by Parliament, would go some way in bolstering the bank resolution framework and
resolve inconsistencies between existing laws regarding liquidation of financial institutions.
36.
Licensing policy needs to be tightened, consolidation incentivized, and state-controlled
bank reform tackled. The licensing moratorium should be maintained in light of the NRB’s
stretched supervisory capacity. The issuance of any new licenses should be postponed. While
increased financial service provision in rural areas is desirable, international experience suggests that
this objective can be achieved through mobile and agent banking without expanding the number of
financial institutions. More stringent fit and proper criteria for bank owners should be adopted and
13

The definition of the CD ratio under the NRB regulation includes also core capital in the denominator, together with
deposits. Most commercial banks already comply with the July 2010 limits.

19
applied to new and existing banks. Consolidation should be encouraged, including by raising
minimum capital requirements substantially in a short time frame and facilitating public trading of
promoters’ shares. The government needs to decide on a strategy to ensure that the state-controlled
banks are adequately capitalized under appropriate management. The cost of bringing the capital to
zero, estimated at 2–3 percent of GDP, should be borne by the government and existing
shareholders.
Authorities’ Views
37.
The NRB acknowledges that risks to financial stability have increased but view them as
manageable. They are concerned about real estate exposure, but mainly for financial institutions
other than commercial banks and especially credit and savings cooperatives. They also anticipate
that the regulations recently introduced would limit banks’ risk taking and note that financial
institutions have already become more cautious in extending loans and have raised interest rates to
mobilize deposits. NRB officials share the view that asset quality is likely to deteriorate, but pointed
to banks’ high reserve coverage and the fact that loans are mainly short term and well collateralized.
They deem liquidity to be the main risk facing the financial system and see a need for banks to
improve their asset/liability management.
38.
The authorities have plans to
Public Debt, 2000-08
(In percent of GDP)
strengthen the financial system. The
140
moratorium on commercial bank
120
applications will be maintained although
100
applications for licenses already in the
Average all
comparator LICs
Average HIPC
80
(incl. Nepal)
pipeline will be processed. This could add
post-completion
point countries
up to four commercial banks to the system.
60
Nepal
They also point out that financial inclusion
40
needs to be enhanced as a large number of
20
people and regions remain under-banked
0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
and hence rural development bank licenses
should be considered more favorably. The
NRB has produced draft guidelines on risk management, which should be issued to banks soon. The
authorities are also open to entertaining options to penalize pledging of promoter shares, including
by deducting them from capital. Government officials reaffirmed their commitment to passing the
amended BAFIA, but cautioned that the timeframe for parliamentary approval was highly
uncertain. Finally, the authorities agree with the need to prepare contingency plans and have
requested the World Bank to provide technical assistance in this area.
C. Fiscal Policy
39.
Maintaining fiscal discipline during the political transition has been a remarkable
achievement. Fiscal policy continues to be broadly prudent, partly because limited capacity
constrains capital outlays and import growth has buoyed revenue. The government’s plans to reduce

20
the domestically financed deficit for 2009/10 to 1.6 percent of GDP are welcome. However, as
revenue targets appear ambitious, the deficit is likely to be close to 2 percent of GDP.
40.
The debt reduction has created fiscal space, but in the short run maintaining the peg
calls for containing domestic borrowing close to current levels. With external debt within
thresholds, the debt sustainability analysis indicates that Nepal is at moderate risk of debt distress
(see Annex 1). This fiscal room could be used for building infrastructure and human capital, and for
the peace process, provided spending quality is ensured. But, in the short term the worsening
external position requires that domestically financed deficits remain close to current levels, while the
overall deficit could be expanded provided it is funded with external grants or concessional debt.
41.

The main considerations in determining the appropriate fiscal stance are14:



Debt level target. Nepal’s external debt, with an NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio of 21¾ percent,
and an NPV of debt-to-exports-and remittances ratio of 63 percent, is well within DSA
thresholds. Nepal’s public debt is well below the average of comparators. However,
contingent liabilities of some 2–3 percent of GDP arising from the required recapitalization of
state-owned banks, and potential additional liabilities stemming from the weak financial
sector suggest that adequate cushions be maintained. In sum, a public debt target of around 40
percent would be appropriate to anchor fiscal policy. To stabilize the public debt-to-GDP ratio
in the long run at this level, the overall deficit could rise to 3½ percent of GDP, and the
domestically financed deficit would be in the range of 2¼–2½ percent of GDP, higher than in
previous years.



Support for the peg and demand management. The expected slowdown in output growth
would suggest a more expansionary fiscal stance in the short term. However, inflationary
pressures remain high, and the peg to the Indian rupee requires that domestically financed
deficits remain contained.



Crowding out and borrowing costs. A high money-to-GDP ratio suggests that, in the longer
run, a somewhat higher domestic debt burden can be accommodated. However, in the short
run, the expected slowdown in money growth due to the deteriorating external position, public
sector borrowing may need to be contained to leave sufficient room for private credit and
control interest costs.

42.
The authorities have made significant strides in mobilizing revenue. Domestic revenues
increased from 10¾ percent of GDP in 2005/06 to 14½ percent of GDP in 2008/09 driven by
reforms in customs administration and the Inland Revenue Department, but also supported by
increasing imports as a share of GDP. Fund TA has contributed to this success. However, to finance
the significant spending needs to support growth and poverty reduction while maintaining an overall
14

See Selected Issues Paper, Nepal—Considerations in the Choice of the Fiscal Stance.

21
deficit consistent with the objectives outlined above, revenue would need to be bolstered further.
The authorities are making continued
Revenue, 2008
(In percent of GDP)
progress. They have developed a
comprehensive reform strategy for the
Lesotho 62.4
customs department, and embarked on a
range of measures to curb tax evasion,
broaden the tax base, and improve the audit
Median
function of the Large Taxpayers Office, as
well as of the IRD in general. Nonetheless,
the projected decline in imports as a
percentage of GDP will test the authorities’
ability to maintain recent revenue gains and
put them on a broader basis.
30
25
20
15
10
5

Comoros
Bangladesh
CAR
Cambodia
Sierra Leone
Madagascar
Ethiopia
DRC
Uganda
Burkina Faso
Laos
Nepal
Mali
Rwanda
Guinea
Mozambique
Guinea-Bissau
Tanzania
Togo
Niger
Burundi
Benin
The Gambia
Malawi
Kenya
Ghana
Eritrea
Liberia
Chad
Lesotho

0

43.
The composition of spending is increasingly tilted towards current expenditure. Some
increase in current spending is well-justified and can be expected to yield significant benefits in the
longer term, e.g. in health and education (where Nepal is below regional comparators but is
embarking on a significant expansion) and on security. However, such spending commitments are
difficult to reverse, and the authorities will need to be careful not to limit the room for higher capital
expenditure, in particular investment in infrastructure (transportation and power). At the same time,
the ability of the government to execute investments of a larger scale without external assistance is
limited, and enhancing implementation capacity should be an urgent priority. In this regard, reforms
aimed at improving the coverage of financial information and the accounting system (including with
Fund TA), monitoring expenditure, and coordinating donor activity should help.
44.
The introduction of an automatic fuel pricing mechanism remains an important
measure to contain quasi-fiscal costs. Although the Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) is running a
small deficit at current prices, the past year’s decline in international fuel prices was not fully passed
through to consumers, allowing NOC to partly repay private sector and government loans. Should
international fuel prices rise further, the financial position of NOC would again be threatened. The
introduction of an automatic fuel pricing mechanism would serve to depoliticize the setting of fuel
prices and prevent a recurrence of fuel shortages and government subsidies and/or loans. The Nepal
Electricity Authority is also suffering losses, as electricity tariffs have not been adjusted for several
years.
Authorities’ Views
45.
MOF officials are confident that the budget deficit will remain broadly in line with
budget targets. While they have lowered their projected inflows of foreign grants and loans to a
level closer to staff projections, they remain confident about meeting the upwardly revised revenue
targets. On the expenditure side, a supplementary budget will regularize higher current expenditure
on account of unbudgeted outlays for security sector reform and civil service wage increases. The
authorities expect that higher recurrent expenditure will be financed by higher revenues, which

22
combined with lower than budgeted capital spending, will result in a lower domestically financed
deficit than budgeted.
46.
The authorities remain committed to maintaining a prudent fiscal stance. They concur
with staff’s analysis that the rapid consolidation of public debt has created some fiscal space, but
agree that fiscal policy will need to remain tight in the near term owing to the current precarious
external situation. They note that pressures are building up for higher spending, but continue to be
optimistic about further revenue gains from ongoing reforms. The authorities indicate that they will
continue to raise fuel prices in small increments to keep NOC losses in check, while raising
electricity tariffs at a time when lengthy power cuts have become routine may not be politically
feasible.
47.
The authorities share staff’s concern about low capital spending. They attribute the
chronic under-spending on investment mainly to capacity constraints. At the same time, the
authorities emphasize that higher spending on health and education should also be considered
investment, although it is not classified as capital expenditure.
D. Structural Reform
48.
Despite broad consensus on the PRSP strategy, the political turmoil has impeded
implementation of structural reforms. After extensive consultations, a poverty reduction strategy
was adopted in 2003, covering the period 2003–07, followed by an interim strategy for 2007–10.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper objectives include macroeconomic stability, institution
building and structural reforms to raise growth. While significant progress has been made in revenue
reform over the past few years, progress in other structural areas has been slow as a result of the
unsettled political situation. Tackling continued difficult labor relations, inadequate infrastructure,
electricity outages, and governance concerns remains key to bolster growth, reduce poverty, and
diversify the economy, thus reducing its vulnerability to shocks.
E. Request for a Disbursement Under the Rapid Credit Facility
49.
Nepal is facing an urgent balance of payments need as a result of the global crisis. The
impact of the global crisis on the Nepalese economy has been multifaceted as outlined in
paragraph 15. Exports are projected to decline by about US$100 million in 2009/10, with exports of
woolen carpets, garments and pulses—the three largest exports—declining by over 30 percent. In
addition, the non-oil terms of trade deteriorated in the first half of 2009/10 and rising international
oil prices added pressure to the balance of payments. The sharp slowdown in remittances and the
worsening economic confidence also contributed to the significant deterioration in the current
account balance (equivalent to 6 percentage points of GDP). The international reserve position of the
NRB has in the course of six months declined by US$400 million as the balance of payments turned
into deficit after years of surpluses.

23
50.
Stabilizing reserves is
Selected Low Income Countries: Reserve Adequacy, 2010
imperative to boost confidence both in
the currency peg and the financial
Armenia
sector. Although the current level of
Uganda
reserves may appear adequate by some
Rwanda
Burundi
standard metrics, substantial financial
Guyana
Zambia
Sierra
Leone
Tajikistan Cambodia
Yemen
sector vulnerabilities require a larger
Azerbaijan
Chad
Angola
Nicaragua Mongolia
PNG
reserve cushion. When compared with
Kenya
Honduras
Sri Lanka
Tonga
other LICs, Nepal’s reserves offer
Maldives
Nepal
Bangladesh
Malawi
Dominica Pakistan
adequate import cover (five months), but
Sudan Vietnam Grenada
are relatively low in percent of broad
Reserves, in months of imports
money, a key indicator in the context of
Sources: Nepalese authorities; APDLISC database; WEO database; and IFS database.
risks of capital flight. The open border
and extensive trade links with India present challenges in enforcing capital control regulations and
highlight the importance of maintaining confidence in the peg and financial sector through adequate
reserve coverage. The decline in reserves triggered liquidity stress in the financial system and
sharply higher interest rates. Confidence was shaken as the rapid decline in reserves underscored the
fragility of the external situation and exposed vulnerabilities in the financial and real estate sectors.
Stabilizing reserves is therefore critical to prevent a vicious circle in which doubts about the peg
translate into deposit withdrawals from banks, which in turn generate pressures on reserves.
120

Reserves, in % of Broad Money

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

51.
To address the impact of the global crisis, the authorities have requested a
disbursement under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) in the amount of SDR28.52 million
(40 percent of quota). The level of access (below the ceiling of 50 percent of quota permissible
under the exogenous shocks window of the RCF) is in line with Nepal’s immediate balance of
payments need. Specifically, the RCF would cover $43 million of a $85 million balance of payments
gap, which is staff’s estimate of the amount needed to stabilize reserves in the short term.15 The
remaining gap is expected to be met through other sources, including donor support, which could be
catalyzed with the approval of an RCF.
52.
The authorities’ policy commitments in the attached letter of intent appropriately
address the impact of the shocks. Although the authorities are not in a position to implement
fundamental structural reforms at present because of the political transition, the NRB and the MOF
have taken measures and made commitments that are sufficient to address the exogenous shock and
put the balance of payments on a sustainable path.
53.
Nepal has adequate capacity to repay the Fund and has committed to safeguard Fund
resources. Access of SDR 28.5 million would not jeopardize Nepal’s debt sustainability. At
24 percent of GDP, Nepal’s external debt is low by international standards. Nepal remains at
15

While a higher reserve level may be desirable in light of the pegged exchange rate regime, the short-term target of
US$2.7 billion would signal an improved external position and help boost confidence.

24
moderate risk of debt distress as headline debt indicators have improved recently. The NPV of
external debt-to-exports-and-remittances is currently at 63 percent and the debt service-to-revenue
has declined in recent years as a result of prudent fiscal policy and impressive revenue gains.
54.
The RCF could also serve as a bridge to an upper credit tranche arrangement that
could support reforms to address some of Nepal’s entrenched structural challenges. Once the
new Constitution is approved and after the elections, the authorities intend to address also the
structural challenges that Nepal is facing and would like to progress to a longer Fund-supported
program, possibly an Extended Credit Facility. Rapid Fund assistance under the RCF would provide
financial and policy support to help address financial and external sector vulnerabilities in a critical
phase of the political transition until a longer-term structural adjustment policy agenda can be
formulated.
Authorities’ view: see attached LOI.
F. Other Issues
55.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF)’s International Cooperation Review Group
has identified deficiencies in Nepal’s anti-money laundering/combating terrorist financing
(AML/CFT) system, which should be addressed. The key deficiencies identified by FATF are: (i)
money laundering and terrorist financing have not been criminalized in a way which is fully in line
with the AML/CFT standard; and (ii) insufficient measures to freeze, seize, and confiscate the
proceeds of crime or of money laundering or funds linked to a terrorist financing offense. Nepal has
yet to enact legislation to enable the rendering of the full range of mutual legal assistance in
AML/CFT investigations, prosecutions, and related proceedings. Nepal’s entire AML/CFT
framework will be subject to assessment by the Asia/Pacific on Money Laundering (APG), the
FATF style regional body in September 2010. This assessment will also provide Nepal with a
comprehensive set of recommendations to improve is AML/CFT system. The IMF, through its
AML/CFT Topical Trust Fund, will initially be assisting Nepal improve its AML/CFT framework
by providing advice on the development of a national strategy which could lead to further technical
assistance to implement the recommendations made by the APG.

25
Figure 1. Nepal: A Long-Term Perspective 1/
Despite increasing trade integration with India, Nepal’s
economic structure has changed little over the past two
decades.

Economic growth has been driven mainly by consumption
and, to a lesser extent, investment, with net exports
contributing negatively in most periods.

Real GDP by Industry
(in percent)
140

Services, in % of GDP (LHS)

120

Agriculture, in % of GDP (LHS)

70
60

Industrial, in % of GDP (LHS)

10

10

5

5

0

0

Political Risk and Ease of Doing Business
90

90

70
60

70
60

Mongolia

50

Lao, P.D.R.

Maldives

Cambodia

40

40

SAARC 3/

30
20

Bangladesh
Sri Lanka
Pakistan

10

30
India

20

Nepal

10
0
200

0
0

50

50

100

150

9

Remittances, in % of GDP (LHS)

2007/08

2005/06

2003/04

2001/02

1999/00

1997/98

1995/96

1991/92

-10

35

30

Cambodia

25
20

30
25

Myanmar

20

Lao, P.D.R.

15

15
Sri Lanka Pakistan
Nepal
India
Bhutan
Maldives
SAARC, ex.
Bangladesh
India 3/

10
5

10
5
0

0
-10

Remittances and Trade Deficit
35

Gross domestic product

35

Ease of Doing Business Rank, 2010

Remittances, which have reached 20% of GDP, have
allowed the country to maintain a strong reserve position,

-5

South Asia: Overall Fiscal Balance and Average Inflation,
1990-2009
40
40

80

Bhutan

Contribution from gross capital formation
Contribution from net exports
Contribution from consumption

But the macroeconomic situation has been fairly stable.

Average inflation, in percent

Low political risk and
conducive regulatory
environment for operation
of business

-10
1989/90

Structural impediments—political instability, difficult labor
relations, weak infrastructure—have constrained growth.

80

-5

2007/08

2005/06

2003/04

2001/02

0
1999/00

0
1997/98

10
1995/96

20
1993/94

40

20

1991/92

30

1989/90

60

1993/94

40

80

Political Risk 2/

15

50

Trade integration with India

100

Real GDP Growth and Contributions
(In percent)
15

-8
-6
-4
-2
Overall fiscal balance, in % of GDP

0

but remittances have fuelled credit growth, which has led
to inflated asset prices and vulnerabilities.
Increase of Domestic Credit since 2004
(in percent of GDP)

5

3

15

0

2

10

10

-5

1

5

5

-10

0

0

0

2007/08

2005/06

2003/04

2001/02

1999/00

1997/98

1995/96

1993/94

1991/92

1989/90

Sources: Nepalese authorities; IMF, World Economic Outlook, International Financial Statistics, Direction of Trade;
World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business Report, Country Policy and Institutional Assessment;
UNDP, Human Development Report; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Nepal’s fiscal year starts in July.
2/ Political Stability & Absence of Violence/ Terrorism rank, 2008 from the World Bank Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment.
3/ Calculated as a simple average of data in South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation member countries.

Myanmar

20

15

Mongolia

4

10

Lao P.D.R.

25

20

15

Cambodia

5

20

India

30

25

Reserves, in months of imports (RHS)

Nepal

6

25

Sri Lanka

35

30

Current account balance, in % of GDP (LHS)

Pakistan

7

Trade deficit, in % of GDP (LHS)

Bhutan

40

35

30

Bangladesh

8

40

26
Figure 2. Nepal: Recent Developments
Migrants and remittances growth have dipped starting in
mid-2009, suggesting a delayed impact of the global
crisis.
Remittances
(Y/Y growth, in percent)
160

160

140

140
Remittances
Migrants

120

120

At the same time, import demand surged and export
performance continued to be lackluster.
External Trade
(3MMA of Y/Y growth)
120

120

100

100

Merchandise exports
Merchandise Imports

80

100

80

80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

0

0

0

-20

-40

-40

-60

-60

A widening trade deficit ensued, financed by a drawdown in
reserves.

0

-20

-20

-40

-40

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

-20

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

100

The liquidity squeeze that followed is expected to
moderate credit growth.

3.5

Credit Growth and Interest Rates
(in percent)
35

16

3.0

30

14

2.5

25

0.3

2.0

20

0.2

1.5

15

Trade deficit (LHS)

0.4

Reserves (RHS)

0.3

0.2

1.0

0.1
0.0

0.0

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

0.1

0.5

In sum, a slowdown in economic activity is anticipated for
2009/10.

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
2008/09
(Est.)
2009/10
(Proj.)

3

2007/08

4

2006/07

5

4

2005/06

5

2004/05

6

2003/04

6

2002/03

7

2001/02

8

7

2000/01

Real GDP Growth 1/
(Y/Y percent change)
8

Domestic credit growth
(LHS)
Interbank Rate (RHS)

12
10
8
6

10

4

5

2

0

0

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

0.4

Inflation, which was higher than that of India in 2008/09, is
now converging.
Consumer Price Index
(Y/Y percent change)
25

25

20

20

Food & beverage inflation (Nepal)
Non-food & services inflation (Nepal)
Headline Nepal CPI inflation
Headline India IW CPI inflation

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

Gross Official Reserves and Trade Balance
(in billions of US dollars)
0.5

Sources: Nepalese Authorities; CEIC Data Co Ltd; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Nepal’s fiscal year starts in July.

27
Figure 3. Nepal: Monetary and Financial Sector Developments
Reserve money growth has been driven by the NRB
reserve accumulation in the past two years until the
recent liquidity squeeze,

which drove up sharply interest rates, that has been
negative in real terms.

NRB Balance Sheet
250

60

200

50

150

40
30

50
0
-50

Reserve Money, 3-m % change of 3-mma, SAAR (RHS)

25
20

2
0

20

-2

-2

10

-4

-4

0

-6

-6

-10

-8

-8

-10

-10

-12

-12

-20

Banks have also high exposure to real estate, whose
prices have climbed.
Real Estate Exposure as of July 2009
(in percent)

120

120

Other loans
Real estate and housing loans

90
85

100

80

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

75

20

20
0

0

-20

-20
CD ratio

Capital
NPL/total loans
adequacy ratio

160

140

140

120

120

100

100
80

80
NEPSE Index
NEPSE index, commercial banks
Mumbai Stock Exchange (SENSEX 30)

60
40

60
40
20

20
0

Sources: Nepalese Authorities and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes loans collateralized with real estate properties (as of July 2009).

Nov-09

40

180

160

Jul-09

40

200

180

Sep-09

60

Stock Market Performance
(07/17/2007=100)
200

Nov-08

80

The stock market, which is dominated by financial
companies, fell sharply in late 2008, but has failed to
recover in step with other countries.

Jul-08

60

100

Total exposure 1/

Sep-08

Private banks
State-owned banks
All banks

80

0
Direct exposure

Public banks have lower CD ratios, but lower CAR and
higher NPLs.
Commercial Banks' Financial Soundness
Indicators
(in percent, as of July 2009 and January 2010)
100

0

May-09

50

Jan-09

55

May-08

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09

5

60

Jan-08

Domestic credit growth, Y/Y change
(LHS)
CD Ratio (RHS)

Mar-08

10

65

Mar-09

70

Nov-07

15

0

4

T-bill rate-real, India

2
0

After the rapid credit expansion of recent years, banks are
heavily exposed to liquidity risk, as CD ratios are high.
Credit to Deposit Ratio and Domestic Credit
Growth
(in percent)
30

4

Jul-07

-200

NDA, in billions of rupees (LHS)

6

T-bill rate-real, Nepal

Sep-07

-150

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09

-100

NFA, in billions of rupees (LHS)

8

6

Jan-07
Mar-07
May-07
Jul-07
Sep-07
Nov-07
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10

100

Interest Rates
8

0

28
Figure 4. Nepal: Fiscal Sector Developments 1/
Revenues have increased significantly …

… but expenditure has caught up.

Revenue (in % of GDP)
16

Expenditure (in % of GDP)
16

Nontax revenue
Other tax revenue
Import-related tax revenues

14

25

25
Capital excl. shares and loans

14

12

12

Wage bill

20

20

Other current
Other

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

-4

-4
Domestic, net

2008/09

2007/08

2006/07

2005/06

2004/05

2003/04

2002/03

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

Overall balance
Primary balance

-5

2004/05

-5

2003/04

-4

2000/01

-4

2008/09

2007/08

2006/07

-7

2005/06

0

2002/03

-6

-7

2004/05

0

2001/02

Grants

2003/04

1

-5

External loans, net

After recovering from large losses in 2008, the state oil
companies (NOC's) profitability is again threatened.

This has helped reduce public - mainly external - debt.

NOC profits and losses (in million NRs/month)

20

20

10

10

0

0
2008/09

30

2007/08

30

2006/07

40

2005/06

40

2004/05

50

2003/04

50

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Nepal’s fiscal year starts in July.

1,000

1,000

Profit/loss excl. debt service

500

500

0

0

-500

-500

-1,000

-1,000

-1,500

-1,500

-2,000

-2,000

Jul/Aug 09

60

External

Jan/Feb 09

Domestic

Jul/Aug 08

60

1,500
Profit/loss

Jan/Feb 08

70

Jul/Aug 07

70

1,500

Jan/Feb 07

Public debt (in % of GDP)

Jul/Aug 06

2002/03

1

2008/09

-1

2002/03

0

2007/08

0

2001/02

0

2006/07

0

2001/02

5

2005/06

1

2000/01

5

Overall and primary balances (in % of GDP)

1

2000/01

10

. … which have overall remained under control.

Def icit f inancing (in % of GDP)

-6

10

2000/01

Grants have increasingly financed deficits …

-5

15

2001/02

0

15

2008/09

0

2007/08

2

2006/07

2

2005/06

4

2004/05

6

4

2003/04

6

2002/03

8

2001/02

10

8

2000/01

10

29
Table 1. Nepal: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2008 1/
1990
Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 2/
Population below $2 per day (in percent)
Poverty gap at $2 per day (in percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (in percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)

1995

2000

2005

…
…
…
…
...

…
…
7.6
…
...

…
…
…
…
...

Achieve universal primary education 3/
Net primary enrollment ratio (in percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (in percent)
Primary completion rate, total (in percent of relevant age group)
Youth literacy rate (in percent of ages 15–24)

…
…
51.0
50.5

…
…
…
…

Promote gender equality 4/
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent of ages 15–24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)

60.0
…
…
6.0

2008

...

…
…
…
…
...

72.8
45.8
66.0
70.5

80.0
61.0
75.0
79.0

80.0
62.0
78.0
79.0

71.0
…
…
3.0

77.1
…
15.1
6.0

89.5
…
…
5.9

98.3
…
…
33.2

142.0
98.8
57.0

117.4
83.3
56.0

85.4
62.9
71.0

62.2
48.1
74.0

55.0
43.0
81.0

…
7.0

…
9.0

…
11.9

830.0
19.0

…
19.0

…
…
243.0
243.0
…
…
0.1
…

…
…
219.9
220.0
…
…
0.3
5.0

37.0
…
198.9
199.0
…
…
0.5
57.0

…
…
180.0
180.0
0.3
1.0
0.5
67.0

…
…
…
173.0
0.3
1.0
0.5
66.0

Ensure environmental sustainability 8/
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (in percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$ per kg. oil equivalent)
Improved water sources (in percent of population)
Improved sanitation facilities (in percent of population)
Nationally protected areas (in percent of total land area)

0.0
33.7
...
72.0
9.0
…

0.1
30.5
...
78.0
15.0
…

0.1
27.3
...
83.0
20.0
…

0.1
25.4
...
89.0
27.0
16.0

…
…
…
89.0
27.0
16.0

Develop a global partnership for development 9/
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports, excluding workers' remittances)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)
Youth unemployment rate (in percent of total labor force ages 15–24)

22.0
15.0
0.3
0.0
…
…

20.0
8.0
0.4
0.0
0.1
…

16.0
7.0
1.1
0.2
0.3
…

16.0
8.0
2.6
0.8
0.5
…

21.0
9.0
15.0
1.4
…
…

33.0
11.6
44.7
5.1
18.1
190.0
54.5
19.1
5.1
32.2

…
9.7
54.7
4.6
25.2
200.0
57.9
21.7
4.6
59.5

49.0
7.0
52.0
4.0
24.3
220.0
60.5
24.4
4.0
55.7

57.0
5.2
39.0
3.1
26.5
300.0
62.7
27.1
3.1
44.1

57.0
…
…
3.0
31.8
400.0
64.0
28.6
3.0
44.7

Reduce child mortality 5/
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (in percent of children under 12 months)
Improved maternal health 6/
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (in percent of total)
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 7/
Contraceptive prevalence rate (in percent of women ages 15–49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (in percent of ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, male (in percent of ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (in percent of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)

General indicators
Adult literacy rate (in percent of people ages 15 and over)
Aid (in percent of GNI)
External debt (in percent of GNI)
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
Gross capital formation (in percent of GDP)
GNI per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Life expectancy at birth (in years)
Population (millions)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Trade (in percent of GDP)

…
…
6.1
49.3 (2006)

Source: World Development Indicators database, January 2010.
1/ In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
2/ Goal 1 targets: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day. Halve, between 1990 and 2015,
the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
3/ Goal 2 targets: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
4/ Goal 3 targets: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
5/ Goal 4 targets: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
6/ Goal 5 targets: Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
7/ Goal 6 targets: Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
8/ Goal 7 targets: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve, by
2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million
slum dwellers.
9/ Goal 8 targets: Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the Special Needs of the Least Developed
Countries. Address the Special Needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states. Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries
through national and international measures in order to make debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement
strategies for decent and productive work for youth. In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs in developing
countries. In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.

30
Table 2. Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2010/11
2006/07

2007/08

Output and prices (percent change)
Real GDP
CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)

3.3
6.4
5.1

5.3
7.7
12.1

Balance of payments
Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In percent of GDP
Trade Balance (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In percent of GDP
Exports value growth (percent change)
Imports value growth (percent change)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of imports of goods and services

4.7
13.2
11.4

3.0
11.8
12.1

4.0
8.0
6.0

19.9
22.4
15.1
7.2
6.2
2.4
2.1

20.0
22.8
15.6
7.2
6.8
2.8
2.2

(In percent of GDP)
14.0
15.9
10.6
5.3
4.1
1.9
1.6

Money and credit (percent change)
Broad money
Domestic credit
Private sector credit

2009/10 2010/11
Projections

(Percent change)

Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall deficit before grants
Overall deficit after grants
Net domestic financing

2008/09

15.3
17.4
11.2
6.2
4.6
2.1
1.9

16.9
17.2
11.8
5.4
2.7
0.2
0.8

(Percent change, end-of-period)
14.0
12.0
12.3

25.3
19.8
24.3

27.7
26.6
28.3

10.6
18.2
19.4

..
..
..

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
-13.8
-0.1
-1,977
-19.1
13.4
25.8
1,996
6

344.0
2.7
-2,265
-18.0
-4.6
8.4
2,473
7

536.3
4.3
-2,707
-21.5
0.5
14.1
2,907
6

-305.8
-2.1
-3,890
-26.4
-11.0
30.0
2,670
5

-0.3
0.0
-3,980
-25.5
6.3
3.0
2,876
5

30.2
728.2
10.3
70.5
9.5

27.4
818.4
12.6
65.0
-4.3

27.0
969.8
12.6
76.9
7.3

23.8
1,116.1
14.7
…
…

21.7
1,254.1
15.6
…
…

Memorandum items
Public external debt (percent of GDP)
GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese rupees)
GDP at market prices (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Exchange rate (Nrs/US$; period average)
Real effective exchange rate (eop, y/y percent change

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

31
Table 3. Nepal: Summary of Government Operations, 2006/07–2010/11 1/
2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2010/11
Projections

Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Non-tax revenue 2/
Grants

102.0
86.2
72.0
14.2
15.8

2009/10
Budget
Staff Proj.
(in billions of Nepalese rupees)
125.3
164.2
229.5
222.5
104.9
139.8
172.6
179.8
86.2
119.0
150.1
157.6
18.7
20.8
22.4
22.2
20.4
24.4
57.0
42.7

Expenditure
Current
Of which: Interest payments
Capital and net lending
Excluding shares and loans

115.8
77.1
6.2
38.7
30.8

142.3
91.5
6.4
50.8
35.5

166.4
114.1
8.0
52.3
36.3

263.1
160.6
9.7
102.5
86.9

249.5
168.8
9.7
80.7
68.2

285.8
195.4
17.3
90.3
76.4

Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants

-29.7
-13.9

-37.4
-17.0

-26.6
-2.2

-90.5
-33.6

-69.6
-26.9

-85.1
-34.9

13.9
2.5
10.1
7.5
11.3

17.0
1.1
9.0
7.9
15.9

2.2
-5.3
3.7
9.0
7.5

33.6
10.3
21.6
11.3
23.3

26.9
3.8
15.1
11.3
23.1

34.9
6.9
18.8
11.9
28.0

(In percent of GDP)
16.9
20.7
14.4
15.6
12.3
13.6
2.1
2.0
2.5
5.1

19.9
16.1
14.1
2.0
3.8

20.0
16.0
14.0
2.0
4.0

Financing
Net foreign loans
Gross disbursements
Amortization
Net domestic financing

250.8
200.7
175.5
25.2
50.2

Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Non-tax revenue 2/
Grants

14.0
11.8
9.9
2.0
2.2

15.3
12.8
10.5
2.3
2.5

Expenditure
Current
Of which: Interest payments
Capital and net lending
Excluding shares and loans

15.9
10.6
0.8
5.3
4.2

17.4
11.2
0.8
6.2
4.3

17.2
11.8
0.8
5.4
3.7

23.8
14.5
0.9
9.3
7.8

22.4
15.1
0.9
7.2
6.1

22.8
15.6
1.4
7.2
6.1

Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants

-4.1
-1.9

-4.6
-2.1

-2.7
-0.2

-8.2
-3.0

-6.2
-2.4

-6.8
-2.8

1.9
0.3
1.4
1.0
1.6

2.1
0.1
1.1
1.0
1.9

0.2
-0.5
0.4
0.9
0.8

3.0
0.9
1.9
1.0
2.1

2.4
0.3
1.4
1.0
2.1

2.8
0.6
1.5
0.9
2.2

-1.1
43.4
13.2
30.2
728.2

-1.3
40.3
12.9
27.4
818.4

0.6
40.3
13.3
27.0
969.8

-2.2
38.3
13.7
24.6
1,106.9

-1.5
37.4
13.6
23.8
1,116.1

-1.4
36.1
14.4
21.7
1,254.1

Financing
Net foreign loans
Gross disbursements
Amortization
Net domestic financing
Memorandum items:
Primary balance (percent of GDP)
Public debt (percent of GDP)
Domestic
External
GDP (in Billions of Nepalese rupees)

Sources: Data provided by the Nepalese authorities, and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year ends in mid-July. Table confined to central government operations as contained in the budget.
2/ Includes privatization receipts.

32
Table 4. Nepal: Reserve Money and Monetary Survey, 2006/07–2009/10
2006/07
Reserve money
Reserve money
Net domestic assets of NRB
Claims on public sector
Claims on private sector
Claims on commercial banks
Other items (net)
Net foreign assets of NRB
Reserve money
Net domestic assets of NRB
Net foreign assets of NRB
Monetary survey
Broad money
Narrow money
Quasi-money
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Credit to public sector
Credit to private sector
Other items(net)
Net foreign assets
Broad money
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Credit to public sector
Credit to private sector
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to government
Credit to private sector
Net foreign assets

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10
Mar
Jul (proj.)

(In billions of Nepalese rupees, end-period)
119
145
196
201
-7
-20
-23
15
17
15
33
28
9
4
4
3
2
1
0
26
-35
-39
-60
-43
126
165
219
187
(Contribution to reserve money growth)
8
21
35
22
12
-11
-2
37
-5
32
37
-16
(In billions of Nepalese rupees, end-period)
395
495
633
676
127
154
196
205
269
341
436
470
263
324
412
488
365
437
554
613
91
97
117
105
274
340
436
508
-102
-113
-142
-124
132
171
221
188
(Twelve-month percent change)
14
25
28
20
27
23
27
41
12
20
27
30
11
6
21
32
12
24
28
30
-5
30
29
-13
(Contribution to broad money growth)
16
15
18
25
3
2
4
4
9
17
19
21
-2
10
10
-5

Source: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

196
15
29
3
24
-41
181
0
20
-19
700
213
487
519
655
134
521
-136
181
11
26
18
14
19
-18
17
3
13
-6

33
Table 5. Nepal: Balance of Payments, 2006/07–2014/15
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15
Projections
Current account
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.

-13.8
-234.7

( in millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
344.0
536.3
-305.8
-0.3
-22.3
-104.1 -220.0
69.6
209.3
-869.2
-666.8
-699.5
-792.5 -901.4

-305.2
-976.9

-1977.4
942.9
2920.3

-2264.8
899.7
3164.5

-2707.1
904.1
3611.1

-3890.0
804.5
4694.5

-3980.3
855.0
4835.3

-4386.5
908.2
5294.7

-128.5
491.9
155.3
620.4

-161.0
613.2
270.8
774.3

-135.5
683.2
361.6
818.7

-319.9
715.1
394.4
1034.9

-359.6
775.0
443.2
1134.6

-385.5
837.3
487.8
1222.9

-436.1
894.7
534.9
1330.8

-490.6
952.8
588.3
1443.4

-510.9
1016.4
647.1
1527.3

114.0
222.4
108.4

115.4
195.2
79.9

152.0
213.5
61.5

157.4
230.6
73.2

172.2
249.0
76.8

184.4
262.7
78.3

196.9
277.1
80.2

203.0
285.5
82.4

208.9
294.0
85.1

Current transfers
Credit, of which:
General government
Workers remittances
Debit

1978.0
2042.5
220.8
1535.7
64.5

2654.4
2692.7
274.4
2071.6
38.2

3227.0
3329.6
327.1
2712.0
102.7

3746.7
3864.8
563.4
2956.0
118.1

4167.4
4298.3
666.5
3325.5
130.9

4565.4
4710.2
677.2
3724.6
144.9

4977.0
5137.1
688.4
4134.3
160.2

5410.5
5587.4
681.4
4589.1
176.9

5891.0
6086.2
671.7
5093.9
195.2

Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Other investment (net)

68.2
-32.0
5.6
0.0
-37.5

114.9
68.7
4.3
0.0
64.5

80.6
68.3
23.7
0.0
44.6

82.0
-190.7
32.7
0.0
-223.5

87.1
123.9
37.6
0.0
86.3

93.3
114.3
47.1
0.0
67.3

100.3
115.3
58.8
0.0
56.5

108.1
106.8
73.5
0.0
33.3

117.2
153.4
84.6
0.0
68.8

Errors and omissions

137.7

-65.7

-250.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Services (net)
Receipts
Of which: tourism
Payments
Income
Credit
Debit

Overall balance

-4841.9 -5343.0 -5894.2
955.7 1005.4 1057.4
5797.7 6348.5 6951.6

160.1

461.9

434.9

-414.6

210.7

185.4

111.5

-5.1

-34.6

-160.1
-195.5
36.4

-461.9
-476.3
15.9

-434.9
-433.8
-1.1

414.6
332.8
-3.3

-210.7
-206.4
-4.3

-185.4
-178.9
-6.5

-111.5
-97.9
-13.5

5.1
19.2
-14.1

34.6
51.0
-11.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

85.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Memorandum items:
Current account (in percent of GDP)
-0.1
Current account, excl. grants (in percent of GDP)
-2.3
Trade balance (in percent of GDP)
-19.1
Exports ( in percent of GDP)
9.1
Imports ( in percent of GDP)
28.3
Remittances ( in percent of GDP)
14.9
Exports (y/y percent change)
13
Imports (y/y percent change)
26
Remittances (y/y percent change)
16
Non-oil GDP growth of GCC countries
7
Total external debt (in percent of GDP)
30
Debt service (in percent of current account receipts)
4
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
1996
(In months of imports)
6
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
10331

2.7
0.6
-18.0
7.1
25.1
16.5
-5
8
35
6
27
3
2473
7
12588

4.3
1.7
-21.5
7.2
28.6
21.5
0
14
31
3
27
3
2907
6
12615

-2.1
-5.9
-26.4
5.5
31.9
20.1
-11
30
9
3
24
3
2670
5
14721

0.0
-4.3
-25.5
5.5
30.9
21.3
6
3
13
4
22
3
2876
5
15638

-0.1
-4.2
-26.2
5.4
31.6
22.2
6
10
12
5
20
3
3055
5
16764

-0.6
-4.4
-26.9
5.3
32.2
22.9
5
10
11
5
19
3
3153
5
18017

-1.1
-4.6
-27.5
5.2
32.7
23.6
5
10
11
5
18
3
3134
4
19426

-1.4
-4.6
-28.0
5.0
33.0
24.2
5
10
11
5
17
3
3083
4
21053

Financing
Change in reserve assets (- =increase)
PRGF(net)
Financing gap

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes assumed coverage of financing gap.

34
Table 6. Nepal: Macroeconomic Framework, 2008/09-2014/15
2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13 2013/14

2014/15

Projections
Growth and prices
Real GDP
CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)

3.0
11.8
12.1

16.9
17.2
11.8
5.4
-2.7
-0.2
0.8

19.9
22.4
15.1
7.2
-6.2
-2.4
2.1

20.0
22.8
15.6
7.2
-6.8
-2.8
2.2

0.5
14.1

-11.0
30.0

6.3
3.0

Fiscal Indicators
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants
Net domestic financing

4.8
5.0
5.0

20.0
22.9
15.6
7.3
-6.7
-2.9
2.3

20.0
23.0
15.5
7.4
-6.6
-3.0
2.3

19.8
23.0
15.4
7.5
-6.4
-3.1
2.4

19.6
23.1
15.5
7.6
-6.5
-3.5
2.6

6.2
9.5

5.2
9.5

5.2
9.5

5.2
9.5

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
536.3
4.3
148.9
1.2
434.9
3.4

External indicators
Gross official reserves (end-of-period)
In months of imports
Public external debt
Public external debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service (in percent of current account receipts)

4.7
5.0
5.0

(percent change)

Balance of payments
Current account
In percent of GDP
Capital and financial account
In percent of GDP
Overall balance
In percent of GDP

4.4
5.0
5.0

(In percent of GDP)

External Trade
Merchandise exports (in U.S. dollar terms)
Merchandise Imports (in U.S. dollar terms)

(percent change)
4.0
4.2
8.0
5.5
6.0
5.0

4.7
13.2
11.4

-305.8
-2.1
-108.8
-0.7
-414.6
-2.8

-0.3
0.0
211.0
1.3
210.7
1.3

-22.3
-0.1
207.6
1.2
185.4
1.1

-104.1
-0.6
215.6
1.2
111.5
0.6

-220.0
-1.1
214.9
1.1
-5.1
0.0

-305.2
-1.4
270.6
1.3
-34.6
-0.2

(in millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
2,907
6.1
3,403
27.0
2.9

2,670
5.4
3,501
23.8
3.5

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

2,876
5.3
3,396
21.7
3.2

3,055
5.1
3,411
20.3
3.0

3,153
4.9
3,463
19.2
2.9

3,134
4.4
3,534
18.2
2.7

3,083
4.1
3,663
17.4
2.6

Table 7. Nepal: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010-2020 1/
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2.9
0.0

6.8
0.1

10.0
0.1

8.6
0.1

7.1
0.1

7.1
0.0

3.2
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit (In millions of SDRs)
Principal
2.9
2.9
6.8
Charges and interests
0.0
0.0
0.2

10.0
0.2

8.6
0.1

10.0
0.1

12.8
0.1

8.9
0.1

5.7
0.1

5.7
0.0

2.9
0.0

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
SDR millions
2.9
Nepalese Rupee billions
0.3
Percent of government revenue
0.2
Percent of exports and remittances
0.1
Percent of debt service 2/
1.2
Percent of GDP
0.0
Percent of quota
4.0

Fund obligations based on existing credit (in millions of SDRs)
Principal
2.9
Charges and interests
0.0

Net use of Fund Credit (in millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments and repurchases

7.0
0.9
0.4
0.2
2.3
0.1
9.8

10.2
1.3
0.5
0.3
3.3
0.1
14.2

8.7
1.1
0.4
0.2
2.7
0.1
12.2

10.1
1.4
0.4
0.2
2.9
0.1
14.2

12.9
1.7
0.5
0.3
3.3
0.1
18.1

9.0
1.2
0.3
0.2
2.1
0.1
12.6

5.8
0.8
0.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
8.1

5.7
0.8
0.2
0.1
1.1
0.0
8.1

2.9
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.5
0.0
4.0

74.1
8.8
4.9
2.5
30.7
0.8
104.0

71.3
8.8
4.4
2.2
25.0
0.7
100.0

64.5
8.2
3.7
1.8
21.7
0.6
90.5

54.5
7.1
2.8
1.4
17.7
0.5
76.5

46.0
6.1
2.2
1.1
14.5
0.4
64.5

36.0
4.8
1.6
0.8
10.4
0.3
50.5

23.2
3.1
0.9
0.5
5.9
0.2
32.5

14.3
1.9
0.5
0.3
3.3
0.1
20.0

8.6
1.1
0.3
0.1
1.8
0.0
12.0

2.9
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.5
0.0
4.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

25.7
28.5
2.9

-2.9
0.0
2.9

-7.0
0.0
7.0

-10.2
0.0
10.2

-8.7
0.0
8.7

-10.1
0.0
10.1

-12.9
0.0
12.9

-9.0
0.0
9.0

-5.8
0.0
5.8

-5.7
0.0
5.7

-2.9
0.0
2.9

1831.0
631.1
304.7
46.6

2018.7
684.3
336.9
52.3

2225.6
742.1
372.6
58.6

2453.8
805.1
412.0
65.4

2705.3
873.6
455.6
72.9

2982.6
948.2
503.7
80.9

Memorandum items: (in billions of Nepalese Rupees)
Nominal GDP
1116.1
1254.1
1380.2
1513.6
1664.7
Exports and Remittances
349.1
402.7
455.0
507.8
567.0
Government Revenue
179.8
200.7
223.6
248.0
275.2
Debt Service 2/
28.7
35.4
37.6
39.8
41.8
Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ includes expected disbursement (SDR 28.52 million) under the requested RCF as of June 2010.
2/ Total debt service includes IMF repurchases and repayments.

35

Outstanding Fund Credit
SDR millions
Nepalese Rupee billions
Percent of government revenue
Percent of exports and remittances
Percent of debt service 2/
Percent of GDP
Percent of quota

2.9
0.4
0.2
0.1
1.0
0.0
4.0

36
ATTACHMENT I
Kathmandu, May 13, 2010
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
1.
Nepal is in the midst of a major political transition. Following the comprehensive
peace accord which ended the 10-year armed conflict in 2006 and Constituent Assembly
elections in April 2008, the political parties remain focused on completing the peace process
and the promulgation of the new constitution, after which general elections will be held.
Despite the progress of the past several years, the political situation remains fragile and the
government’s ability to implement comprehensive structural reform is currently limited.
2.

The global crisis is having a delayed and substantial impact on our economy:



Remittance deceleration. Nepal is heavily dependent on remittances—constituting
over 20 percent of GDP. Owing to the global crisis the outflow of Nepali workers
abroad decreased by 12 percent during 2009. As a result of fewer Nepalis leaving to
work abroad, the growth of remittances halved to 17 percent year-on-year in the first
half of 2009/10 from an average of 34 percent in 2005–08.



Trade balance deterioration. Exports have declined by 14 percent so far this fiscal
year due to falling demand.1 While exports to India have dropped by 6 percent,
exports to other countries are down by 26 percent, reflecting the appreciation of the
Indian rupee. At the same time, as imports continued to soar (by 46 percent) on the
assumption that remittances growth would continue in line with previous years, the
trade deficit has risen by 67 percent in the first half of 2009/10, reaching 28 percent
of GDP. In sum, the 2009/10 current account is set to record a sizeable deficit of
2 percent of GDP, the first deficit since 1997/98.



Reserve drain. These developments, combined with net capital outflows, have in just
a few months reduced international reserves by US$ 400 million (13 percent) from
their July 2009 peak to US$ 2.5 billion in March 2010. Reserves now cover only 5
months of imports compared to 6 months as recently as October 2009.

1

Nepal’s fiscal year begins in mid-July.

37
3.

The impact of these shocks on Nepal’s economy has been significant.



Liquidity and financial sector. The slowdown in remittance growth contributed to a
financial sector liquidity squeeze, which drove up interest rates and exposed financial
sector weaknesses. As reserves fell, some banks experienced liquidity stress as banks’
credit-to-deposit ratios are high. The Nepal Rastra Bank’s (NRB) liquidity injections
have since lowered interbank interest rates and banks are reported to have reduced
new loan disbursements. But, asset quality is likely to deteriorate in the coming
months as roll-over and liquidity risks increase.



Economic activity. Decelerating remittance growth, tightening liquidity conditions,
and a poor monsoon suggest activity is weakening: real GDP in 2009/10 is projected
to fall to less than 4 percent compared to 4¾ percent in 2008/09. This slowdown will
make the government’s efforts to accelerate economic growth and reduce poverty on
a sustainable basis more difficult.

4.
The government of Nepal recognizes that the deteriorating external position and
the financial sector require immediate attention. The speed with which reserves have
declined over the past months is worrisome. While we have capital controls in place, our
open border and extensive trade links with India present challenges in enforcing these
regulations. Against this background and financial sector vulnerabilities, we view a relatively
high reserve coverage as essential. To address these challenges, we are committed to strong
macroeconomic policies to safeguard external and financial sector stability.
Policies to Address Shocks
5.
The NRB has recently introduced measures to improve the provision of
liquidity:


The terms for repo transactions were lengthened from 28 to 45 days—similar to
measures taken in many other countries during the crisis;



Commercial banks’ call deposits can count towards meeting the statutory liquidity
ratio; and



A new refinancing facility to channel credit to the export, power and tourism sectors
has been introduced.

We expect these measures to contribute to an easing of liquidity conditions in the coming
months and promote credit provision to priority sectors, while overall liquidity conditions
remain consistent with the peg.
6.
The NRB has taken measures to safeguard financial sector stability. The rapid
credit growth in recent years—fueled partly by remittance inflows—has created asset price

38
bubbles, particularly in the real estate and housing markets. To strengthen the health of the
financial sector and financial stability, we have recently taken several prudential measures.


Licensing policy. The NRB imposed a moratorium in December 2009 on new bank
licenses while the policy is being reviewed. However, to promote the provision of
financial services in rural areas, the moratorium has been lifted for microfinance
institutions (class D) and eased for development banks (class B).



Lower single borrower limits. Single borrowing limits will be lowered to 25 percent
of capital by July 2010, with exceptions for some infrastructure projects such as
hydropower, cable cars, and the planned fast track road linking Kathmandu with the
Terai region.



Real estate limits. Banks are required to lower exposure to real estate loans (and
housing) to 25 (40) percent of total loans by end-2009/10. Both limits will be further
lowered by 10 percentage points by end 2010/11 and by an additional 5 percentage
points by end 2011/12. Loans above the limit will be penalized by provisioning
requirements on the basis of a risk weight of 150 percent.



Loan-to-value limits. Commercial banks loans cannot exceed 60 percent of fair
market value of collateral or project.



Credit-to-deposit ratio limits. Commercial banks credit-to-deposit ratios should not
exceed 95 percent by end-2009/10, 85 percent by end-2010/11, and 80 percent by
end-2011/12.



Facilitating bank restructuring. The NRB has begun liquidation of Nepal
Development Bank (NDB) and also completed the restructuring of the Nepal
Bangladesh Bank.



Risk management. The NRB has drafted risk management guidelines that will be
issued to commercial banks by July 2010.

We recognize that some of these new prudential measures will be challenging for the
commercial banks to meet. In this context, we reaffirm our commitment to enforcing existing
regulations and developing bank-by-bank time bound actions plans if necessary.
7.
We remain fully committed to maintaining financial stability and support the
current peg. The peg to the Indian rupee has been and continues to be a key anchor for
Nepal’s economic stability. We have taken strong measures to stem the balance of payments
deficit. The NRB recently raised margin requirements on gold and silver imports and
introduced quantitative limits on gold and silver imports. The government has also raised
tariffs on gold imports, and is considering measures to curb imports of consumption goods to
safeguard foreign exchange resources for growth-enhancing imports of capital goods. In the

39
mid-term review of monetary policy, to protect the balance of payments position, the NRB
also limited the availability of the passport foreign facility to twice a year and $2,000 per
transaction. The NRB and the Government of Nepal will take additional measures as
necessary. We are aware that maintaining quantitative limits on the availability of foreign
exchange for leisure travel may give rise to an exchange restriction under Article VIII of the
IMF’s Articles. In this context, we commit to removing any restrictions that may arise from
these measures by March 2011 as the balance of payments situation is expected to improve.
Remittance growth is expected to recover in 2010 as the host countries of our workers
recover and import growth should moderate over the coming year in response to recent
measures and tighter liquidity conditions. However, we do not anticipate that remittances
growth will recover to the levels prevailing before the crisis, and generating strong export
growth in the near term will remain difficult. In a longer-term perspective, the widening
productivity differential with India presents challenges but we anticipate that continued labor
mobility to offset competitiveness losses. Once the peace process is concluded, we expect to
advance structural reform to address the productivity gap.
8.
While the measures outlined above are important in the short term to support
the balance of payments position, we are cognizant that liquidity provision needs to be
consistent with the peg. Against the background of a challenging external situation,
monetary policy needs to remain tight and interest rates above those of India. While NRB
liquidity provision through blanket repos has succeeded in normalizing interbank rates during
the recent liquidity squeeze, going forward, individual banks’ liquidity needs will be met
through the Supplementary Liquidity Facility at penalty rates. For solvent banks without
adequate collateral, the bank rate window will be used under heightened NRB oversight and
conditionality. The modalities for accessing the bank rate window will be further clarified by
July 2010 in our continuing effort to improve communication with banks and the public. The
NRB remains committed to intervening insolvent banks, as demonstrated in the case of the
Nepal Bangladesh Bank and the Nepal Development Bank.
9.
We are committed to strengthening financial sector supervision further to
safeguard financial stability and enhance the NRB’s capacity and credibility. Before
end-July 2010, the NRB will begin a thorough assessment of the health of the financial
sector, including solvency and liquidity risks, through stress testing and special on-site
inspections. In this area, we welcome the possibility of a Fund resident technical assistance
advisor. To the extent shortcomings are identified, corrective action will be taken promptly
and regulatory forbearance eschewed. Beginning in 2010/11, the NRB will also introduce
penalties for pledging of promoters’ shares by deducting them from bank capital, in line with
international practice. We will also strive to improve the timeliness and accuracy of data
compilation, in particular in the financial sector.
10.
Contingency planning will be enhanced. With technical assistance from the World
Bank, the NRB will develop a contingency plan in case financial sector stress breaks into a
crisis. We will seek to expedite passage by the Constituent Assembly of the amended Bank

40
and Financial Institutions Act (BAFIA), which would strengthen the bank resolution
framework.
11.
The bank licensing policy will remain restrictive and financial sector
consolidation will be encouraged. The NRB’s supervisory capacity has not been developed
in line with the rapid growth of the financial sector. Against this background, further
licensing of commercial banks will remain very restrictive and the supervisory capacity of
the NRB will be strengthened commensurate with the expansion of the financial sector. To
ensure access to financial services in rural areas, the NRB will work with commercial banks
and microfinance institutions to encourage provision of services through mobile banking and
agent banking, without additional banks entering the financial system. We will also promote
banking sector consolidation by facilitating the public trading of promoters’ shares by July
2010.
12.
We remain committed to reforming two state-owned banks. Although progress
has been made in strengthening the management of Nepal Bank Limited (NBL) and Rastriya
Banijya Bank (RBB), a comprehensive strategy is needed to bring the banks back to
solvency. To build on the reforms to date, we will begin recapitalizing NBL in 2010/11 and
continue our efforts to strengthen the management of both banks.
13.
The fiscal stance will remain prudent. While the fiscal consolidation over the past
years has created some fiscal space, the current external situation calls for a continued
cautious fiscal stance to support the peg and maintain macroeconomic stability. We will keep
domestic financing to around 2 percent of GDP in 2010/11 and increase it moderately to
around 2½ percent in 2011/12 provided the external situation improves. In addition,


On revenue administration, we will continue to build on the recent improvements to
increase the revenue-to-GDP ratio. We have developed a comprehensive reform
strategy for the customs department, measures to curb tax evasion, broaden the tax
base, and improving the audit function of the large tax payer office, with the help of
Fund technical assistance.



We are committed to easing capacity constrains in capital spending. Recurrent
spending will be restrained, while health, education and security expenditure will be
safeguarded.



We also intend to improve the coverage of the financial information, the accounting
system, monitoring expenditure, and systems to coordinate donor activity.



We will ensure that the financial health of the Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) is
safeguarded and we will continue our strategy of incremental price adjustments as
needed to avoid losses of the NOC.

Request for Access under the Rapid Credit Facility

41

14.
Despite these measures, the pressure on the NRB’s international reserves and
the financial sector is expected to continue in the near term. Against this background, the
Government of Nepal requests access of 40 percent of quota (SDR 28.52 million) through the
Rapid Credit Facility based on the urgent balance of payment needs and the strength of our
macroeconomic adjustment polices. Access at this level is motivated based on the need to
safeguard reserve adequacy and maintain confidence in the face of significant external and
financial sector risks. In addition to our commitments above, to benchmark our progress, we
are committed to meeting a set of Indicative Targets for end-2009/10, including the NRB’s
net international reserves and net domestic assets, and the government’s net domestic
financing (Table 1). We also expect that Fund financial support will serve as a bridge to an
Extended Credit Facility, which we hope to start negotiating later this year.
15.
The RCF will also provide policy support for our poverty reduction strategy.
Our current Plan/Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper objectives include macroeconomic
stability, institution building and structural reforms to raise growth and reduce poverty. We
expect Fund financial support and our policy commitments under the RCF to have a catalytic
effect on confidence, helping to catalyze international donor support and strengthen
macroeconomic stability. An interim poverty reduction plan covering the period mid-2007 to
mid-2010 is currently in place. Moving forward, a three-year plan covering mid-2010 to mid2013 with special focus on employment and equity is being formulated in consultation with
stakeholders.
16.
We are committed to completing a safeguards assessment. In this context, we are
liaising with Fund staff to conduct an external audit for the NRB in accordance with
international standards, and authorize Fund staff to have access to the external audit reports
and hold discussion with the auditors.
17.

The Government of Nepal and the NRB agree to publish this letter.

Sincerely yours,
/s/

/s/

Surendra Pandey

Yuba Raj Khatiwada

Minister of Finance

Governor, Nepal Rastra Bank

42

Nepal: Indicative Targets

I.
II.
III.

IV.

V.

Floor on net international reserves of the NRB
(in millions of US dollars) 1/
Ceiling on net domestic assets of the NRB (in
millions of Nrs.) 2/
Net dometic financing of the budget deficit
(ceiling on cumulative flow from beginning of
FY, in million Nrs) 3/
Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of new
nonconcessional external debt(in millions of
US dollars) 4/
Ceiling on accumulation of external payments
arrears (in millions of US dollars) 5/

Jul-09

Mar-10

2792

2581

Jul-10
Indicative
targets
2,400

Actual

Actual

-23,179

14,517

15,500

23,174

-9,194

23,500

0

0

0

0

0

0

1/ Net international reserves of the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) will be calculated as gross international reserves
including holdings of nonconvertible currencies less international reserve liabilities. Holdings of Indian rupees
will be converted into U.S. dollars at the program exchange rate of 45 Indian rupees per U.S. dollar; holdings
of other nonconvertible currencies will be converted into U.S. dollars at market exchange rates. Assets
denominated in SDRs will be converted at the program exchange rate of 1.57 U.S. dollars per SDR. Gross
international reserves consist of monetary gold holdings of the NRB, holdings of SDRs, Nepal’s reserve
position in the IMF, cash in foreign currencies, and foreign currency assets held abroad that are under the
direct and effective control of the NRB and readily available. International reserve liabilities consist of all
outstanding liabilities of Nepal to the IMF and any convertible currency liabilities to nonresidents with an
original maturity of up to one year.
2/ Net domestic assets of the NRB will be calculated as the difference between domestic assets and liabilities
of the NRB. Domestic assets consist of claims by the NRB on the government, state-owned enterprises,
financial institutions, banks, the private sector and other assets as reported in the NRB’s balance sheet.
Domestic liabilities consist of government deposits, capital accounts, and other liabilities as reported in the
NRB’s balance sheet.
3/ Net domestic financing of the budget deficit is defined as the sum of net credit to government by the
banking system (NRB and deposit money banks), net changes in holdings of treasury bills and other
government securities by nonbanks, and privatization receipts by the government.
4/ The definition of debt, for the purposes of the program, is set out in Executive Board Decision N. 12274,
Point 9, as revised on August 24, 2000.
5/ The indicative target on nonaccumulation of external arrears is continuous.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
NEPAL
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Request for Disbursement Under the Rapid Credit Facility
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
(in consultation with other departments)
May 17, 2010

Contents

Page

I. Relations with the Fund .......................................................................................................2
II. Relations with the World Bank Group.................................................................................5
III. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ....................................................................13
IV. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................15

2
APPENDIX I: NEPAL—FUND RELATIONS
(As of February 28, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 9/06/61; Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on May 30, 1994.

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
71.30
71.30
0.01

Percent Quota
100.00
99.99
0.02

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
68.10
63.71

Percent Allocation
100.00
93.56

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
ECF arrangements

SDR Million
48.47

Percent Quota
67.99

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)

VI.

Type

Approval
Date

ECF
ECF
SAF

11/19/03
10/05/92
10/14/87

Expiration
Date
11/18/07
10/04/95
10/13/90

49.90
16.79
26.11

Projected Obligations to Fund (in millions of SDRs; based on existing use of
resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/interest
Total

VII.

49.90
33.57
26.11

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2.85
0.02
2.87

2.85
0.02
2.87

6.77
0.12
6.89

9.98
0.10
10.08

8.55
0.07
8.63

Exchange Rate Arrangement

In February 1993, Nepal unified its exchange rate and eliminated the multiple currency
practice associated with the previous dual exchange rate arrangement. In October 1997, the
exchange arrangement of Nepal was reclassified as that pegged to a single currency unit from
pegged to a currency composite. The Nepalese rupee is pegged to the Indian rupee at a rate of
1.6. Currently, all merchandise imports (except for a few goods restricted for security or
related reasons) are freely available through an open general license system, with foreign
exchange provided through the banking system at the market exchange rate. Nepal maintains
an exchange restriction subject to Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles arises from quantitative

3
limits on the availability of foreign exchange for leisure travel abroad since the NRB’s
approval is not freely given in cases in which a resident requires foreign exchange for the
purpose of making a bona fide payment for such transactions. In Nepal, residents use a
foreign exchange facility called the Passport Facility to obtain foreign exchange in respect of
leisure travels. The facility, which is run by authorized banks and financial institutions, has a
monetary limit of $2,000 and cannot be used for more than two times per year. The monetary
limit is further reduced to $1,000 for travelers to Tibet of China and SAARC countries
(excluding India), if they travel by land. Foreign exchange applicants may go to the NRB to
obtain additional foreign exchange but the current policy of the NRB is not to provide
foreign exchange beyond these limits even if the bona fide nature of the request is proved. As
of February 26, 2010, the exchange rate for the Nepalese rupee (Nr) was US$1=Nrs. 74.15.
VIII. Safeguards Assessments
A safeguards assessment of the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) was completed in 2002. The
assessment concluded that substantial risks exist in the area of external and internal audits,
and the internal control system of the NRB. A safeguards monitoring assessment was
completed in October 2004. Staff findings and recommendations were reported in IMF
Country Report No. 02/205. The NRB has made limited progress in the implementation of
these recommendations, particularly with respect to the use of international standards in
financial reporting and external audit and strengthening of internal controls in the NRB. The
absence of external audit of the Nepal Rastra Bank in accordance with international standards
is a key safeguards risk.
IX.

2008 Article IV Consultation

The Executive Board discussed the staff report for the 2008 Article IV consultation (IMF
Country Report No. 08/181) on May 16, 2008. It was proposed that the Article IV
consultations take place on the 12-month cycle.
X.
MCM

FAD

Technical Assistance Since 2001
Purpose
Accounting
Central bank and banking reform
Internal Audit
Monetary policy
Monetary operations
Strengthening central bank accounting and controls
Foreign exchange reserves management
Financial Sector Supervision
Liquidity management

Year
2004–06
2001–02
2004–07
2003
continuous
2005
2003–07
2006–07
2003

Implementation of a large tax payer unit
Review of tax policy and VAT administration
Tax and customs administration reform

2003
2003
2003–04, 2006–10

4
Follow up on the LTO and customs
administration reform
Tax/customs policy (fiscal reform)
Revenue Administration
Fiscal Transparency Legislation
Peripatetic LTU Advisor
Treasury Single Account
Capacity Building Workshop

2004, 2006–07, 2010
2003, 2007
2007, 2009
2007
2007–08
2008–09
2009–10

LEG

Redrafting of income tax laws
Income Tax Act
Banking Law
Fiscal Law
Fiscal Transparency

2000–01, 2007
2003
2004–05
2007
2007

STA

Multisector statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Producer prices statistics
Monetary statistics
National accounts

2001, 2003, 2008–09
2002–04
2002–05
2003
2003, 2005–06, 2008

XI.

Resident Representative/Advisor

Mr. Alexander Pitt has been the Resident Representative since August 2006.

5
ANNEX II. NEPAL—RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of March 3, 2010)
I. PARTNERSHIP IN NEPAL’S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
Nepal’s decade-long conflict formally ended in November 2006. In 2008, the country voted
in a Constituent Assembly (CA), named a President, elected a Prime Minister, formed a
coalition government, and set about the task of writing a new constitution by 2010, with a
new round of elections planned for 2011. It also abolished the monarchy and declared Nepal
a federal democratic republic, vastly altering administrative and decision-making powers.
The current Prime Minister has been leading Nepal’s coalition government since May 2009.
He has set himself two top priorities – delivering the new constitution and completing the
peace process.
The key challenges facing a new Government at this juncture are to rebuild the legitimacy of
the state, sustain the peace, maintain law and order, and deliver benefits to those traditionally
excluded and to society at large. The National Planning Commission is preparing a new
Three Year Plan. The central focus of the Plan is on employment creation, with a short run
emphasis on public works programs (based on labor intensive infrastructure projects) until
the investment climate improves and private sector investment takes over in creating
sustainable jobs.
Thirty-eight donors operate in Nepal. The challenge for donors is to transition from scattered
donor projects and programs outside Government to harmonized delivery through
Government systems and institutions. However, Government needs to strengthen its capacity
to manage resources efficiently with greater focus on results.
II. IMF-WORLD BANK COLLABORATION IN SPECIFIC AREAS
A. Areas in which the Bank Leads and There is No Direct IMF Involvement
The areas in which the Bank leads the policy dialogue and there is no direct IMF
involvement are the social sectors, infrastructure, environment, and agriculture.
In education, the Bank has encouraged Nepal’s decentralization efforts to achieve more
effective delivery of public services and has played a pivotal role in supporting the transfer of
public schools to community management. Along with other donors, the Bank is actively
supporting Nepal’s well-formulated, ten-year primary education reform program. IDA
resources support the Education for All (EFA) project, which closed recently, and the
ongoing School Sector Reform Project (SSRP). The EFA Sector Wide Approach (SWAp)
pooled together the government and donor funds, which financed over ninety percent of the
expenditures of the primary education sub-sector. The SSRP builds on EFA and brings

6
together GON and 12 development partners – of which 9 partners pool their resources with
those of the GON, and 3 development partners who support the program directly. The
Higher Education Project supports improving quality and relevance of higher education and
research through a set of incentives for promoting effective management and financial
sustainability of academic institutions, and improving access for academically qualified
under-privileged students, including girls, dalits and educationally disadvantaged janajati to
higher education through financial assistance and enhanced capacity of higher education
schools.
In health, the Bank has been supporting the devolution of sub-health posts to local
communities, and the development of a sector-wide reform strategy. A Health Sector
Reform Project seeks to address inequities and improve the health of the Nepalese as a
means to develop healthy and capable human power to support poverty alleviation. The
project seeks to expand access to, and increase the use of, essential health care services,
especially by underserved populations. To support both human health and animal health, an
Avian Influenza Control Project is under implementation.
To support broad-based growth, the Bank supports investments in several key infrastructure
sectors. The Power Development Project (PDP) is helping to develop the country’s
hydropower potential to meet electricity demand, improve access of rural areas to electricity
services and promote private sector participation. The Road Sector Development Project
provides all-season road access in select hill districts. The recently closed
Telecommunications Sector Reform Project supported sectoral policy reforms in addition to
the provision of greater rural access to telecommunications services through the introduction
of a private operator.
To support rural development, the Nepal Irrigation and Water Resources Management
Project aims to improve irrigated agriculture productivity and management of selected
irrigation schemes, and enhance institutional capacity for integrated water resources
management. At the same time, project finance is supporting decentralization to improve
service delivery by promoting grassroots-driven, bottom-up planning and community-based
management. The Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project (RAIDP) helps
to improve governance and service delivery for rural infrastructure, while at the same time
promoting agricultural and rural economic growth, and generating employment through
direct project investments in rural transport infrastructure. The Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation Project aims to improve rural water supply and sanitation sector institutional
performance and mainstream the “Board” (Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Fund
Development Board) approach into the Government’s system. It also supports communities
to form inclusive local water supply and sanitation user groups that can plan, implement, and
operation drinking water and sanitation infrastructure that delivers sustainable health,
hygiene, and productivity benefits to rural households.

7
After a long gap, the Bank re-engaged in the agriculture sector through the recently approved
Agriculture Commercialization and Trade Project. It aims to improve the competitiveness
of smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains and
25 districts supported by the project. To address the food insecurity issues, a Social Safety
Net Project is under implementation. It addresses the short and medium term implications
of the global food crisis for the country by strengthening the agricultural production and
safety net mechanisms on a broad scale. The objective is to ensure access to food and basic
needs for vulnerable households in the short term in food insecure districts.
Recognizing that Nepal’s development agenda is closely intertwined with peace building, a
Peace Support Project is under implementation. The project aims to contribute to the peace
process by providing interim cash transfers and services to conflict-affected groups.
While many of the Bank’s investment/sector operations mentioned above also support social
inclusion, a more direct initiative in this area that received Bank support is the Poverty
Alleviation Fund (PAF). PAF channels resources to the poorest groups in rural communities
by creating infrastructure, employment and income-generating opportunities. Bank financing
through the PAF project supports implementation of the fund in 75 districts.
B. Areas in which the Bank Leads and its Analysis Serves as Input into the IMF
Program
The Bank takes the lead in assisting Nepal with public expenditure analysis. A new PER is
underway to be delivered in FY10 focusing specifically in education and health sectors. In
addition, the Bank’s intensive dialogue and technical assistance have been supporting the
reforms, including the development of a credible Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) since 2002. This framework covers the whole budget but more specifically to
prioritize public expenditure to ensure efficient budget allocations for priority programs and
projects.
C. Areas of Shared Responsibility
The Bank and the IMF—together with other external development partners—provided
assistance during the preparation of the PRS and the subsequent PRS Progress Reports. In
addressing the PRS pillar on good governance, the Bank and the IMF are assisting in the area
of civil service reform through policy dialogue and TA towards ensuring an autonomous and
professional civil service as well as fiscal sustainability.
Financial sector reform is a fundamental area for Bank/IMF involvement. Since the
mismanagement of key financial institutions was a major element of poor governance,
progress in implementing financial sector reform has been the litmus test of political
commitment to governance reform. The Bank and the Fund are helping the GoN resolve the
current vulnerability in the financial sector by assisting them with stress testing and

8
strengthening the NRB's capacity to prepare various scenarios and contingency planning. The
Bank and the IMF are helping to strengthen the central bank’s authority and regulatory
capacity, improve the financial health and restructure of the two largest state banks, and
upgrade the legislative and institutional framework for the financial sector. The Financial
Sector Technical Assistance project supports: (i) the restructuring and reengineering of the
Central Bank; (ii) introduction of professional management teams into the two large ailing
commercial banks (the first step toward eventual restructuring); (iii) capacity building
towards enhanced credit information; and (iv) upgrading of staff training in financial
institutions. The recently closed Financial Sector Restructuring project supported
strengthening of the Central Bank and deepening the reform process within the two banks.
III. WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGY AND LENDING OPERATIONS
In June 2009, an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) was presented to the Bank’s Board of
Directors. Given the transitional nature of Nepal’s situation, with a new government, a new
constitution being drafted and elections for the federal state expected in 2011, the Bank
Group prepared an ISN covering FY10 and 11. This joint IDA-IFC strategy aims to leverage
Bank and IFC resources and realize synergies. It builds on the areas which have shown to be
robust and to modalities of implementation tailored to Nepalese traditions. Further, the Bank
also took on board the lessons of working in countries in post-conflict situations: to be
modest and to keep it simple. The strategy will improve IDA project’s sensitivity to the root
causes of the conflict and social tensions by adopting a “peace filter”.
Supporting the overarching goal of promoting peace and development, the strategy is
organized around three themes that emerged during consultations within the Bank Group and
with the Government, donor partners, and civil society. The first theme addresses the cluster
of challenges facing the State in adapting and constructing the systems, institutions, and
capacities needed for the new Nepal. The second focuses on overcoming constraints and
bottlenecks faced by the productive sector, especially in terms of productivity, connectivity
and sustainability. The third theme concentrates on expanding and honing service delivery
programs that can increase opportunities and well-being, especially for the poor and
excluded. Social inclusion and promoting peace cut across all of these themes as a necessary
foundation for the new Nepal. Within each of these themes, the strategy identifies specific
areas where the Bank Group can make a difference, ranging from concessional IDA lending
to the Government, engagement with the private sector through the IFC, advisory services,
and support for regional initiatives.
The Lending Program: In FY10, IDA financing was approved for the School Sector
Reform Project and the Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Additional
Financing Project for total new commitments of US$175 million. Two more projects are in
the pipeline for FY10 – the Second Health and HIV/AIDS project and Social Safety Net
Additional Financing project.

9
Bank Assistance Program in Nepal: The Nepal country portfolio includes 22 operations
with a net commitment value of US$937 million, of which 14 are IDA funded projects
(US$905 million) and 8 are Trust Funded operations (US$32 million). The table below
shows the distribution of IDA/TF support according to the major ISN pillars, with 5 percent
of funds contributing to state-building and the peace process, 42 percent to the building
blocks for sustainable growth and 53 percent to improving service delivery, particularly at
the community level. About 45 percent of our financial assistance involves community
management at the local level.
Economic and Sector Work: In addition to the lending program, the Bank is also engaged
in supporting a wide range of analytic work to deepen knowledge and underpin future policy
decisions and to prepare an informed basis for project-related assistance. For example, the
Bank team, with support from bilateral partners DFID and Denmark, is working closely with
the Central Bureau of Statistics to carry out the next Living Standards Survey (NLSS 3)
which will produce core data on poverty trends and access to service. Analysis of migration
and remittances is also on-going, and study findings are expected to inform policy choices
relating to job skills development, macro-economic management, and targeting of
infrastructure and services. Support for MTEF and for assessing risks and opportunities for
improving financial sector management and services has been provided in the past year, and
analysis of international experience on specialized topics (such as fiscal decentralization) is
being carried out at the request of the Constituent Assembly committees. Advice has been
provided on ways to improve existing social protection systems, including targeting, and on
the design of a national social protection framework.
A cluster of analytic exercises are underway related to adaptation of water resource
management and river hydrology, climate change, and risk reduction related to earthquakes,
floods, and glacial lake outbursts (the disaster risk work is being carried out jointly with other
development partners). In the field of water resource management, the Bank water team has
supported the establishment of a geographic information system (GIS) for WECS,
development of river basin modeling, and capacity building for modeling within the GON,
and the next analytic step is to update the master plans for the three major river basins in
Nepal, taking an integrated basin management view. The climate change team, in
collaboration with ADB, DFID, and the governments for Denmark and Norway, among
others, has supported important national and regional collaboration last year in preparation
for the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference.
Lastly, the Bank is also supporting several regional programs that involve and will benefit
Nepal. The regional water initiative is working towards building the information base and
national and regional coalitions that will be needed to take concerted action over the medium
to long term to address the region’s river management issues. The Global Tiger Initiative is
bringing together the tiger range countries to protect the habitat of this severely endangered
species and Nepal has agreed to host the regional secretariat that will focus on the illegal

10
trade in tiger parts. The cross-border energy program comprises advisory services to assist
in its financial assistance for hydropower and transmission line investments that could lay the
basis for such trade. Work is now starting to operationalize assistance in this area.
Table II.1. IDA and Recipient-Executed Trust Funds
As of January 31, 2010

Project Name

Pillar I: State-building
Peace Support Project
Legal and Judicial Reforms (IDF)
Strengthening Capacity of PPMO
(IDF)
Sub-total Pillar I
Pillar II: Sustainable Growth
Power Development
Micro-hydro Project (TF)
Rural Access Improve. & Decentrali
Road Sector Development Project
Irrig & Water Res Mgmt Proj
Agr Commercialization & Trade
NP Financial Sector TA
NP Financial Sector TA (DFID)
Sub-total Pillar II
Pillar III: Service Delivery
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
Biogas Support Program (CDCF)
Biogas Support Program IV (DFID)
Second Higher Education Project
Targetted Secondary School Stipend
(JSDF)
School Sector Reform Program
Nepal Health Sector Program Project
Avian Flu
NP Social Safety Net - Food Crisis
NP Social Safety Net (GFC TF)
PAF II
Sub-total Pillar III
Total Pillars I, II, and III

Board Date

Revised
Closing
Date

5/6/2008
8/22/2007

6/30/2011
12/22/2010

50.0
0.41

19.7
0.3

4/1/2012

0.48
50.9

0.1
20.1

12/31/2012
6/30/2016
12/31/2013
6/30/2012
6/30/2013
6/30/2015
12/31/2011
2/29/2012

164.0
1.96
77.0
42.6
64.3
20.0
9.5
10.7

18.2
0.0
21.2
21.3
4.6
0.0
7.7
8.0

390.1

81.0

7/16/2008

5/22/2003
6/30/2007
6/21/2005
12/6/2007
12/6/2007
6/4/2009
12/19/2002
7/1/2003

Net
Comm
($m)

Disb to
date
($m)

6/1/2004
8/1/2004
10/4/2007
2/22/2007
1/2/2009

12/31/2010
11/30/2015
10/31/2010
1/15/2014
7/2/2013

52.3
7.00
5.00
60.0
1.90

26.7
0.8
0.6
5.5
0.3

9/22/2009
9/9/2004
1/19/2007
9/30/2008
8/15/2008
12/6/2007

12/15/2014
7/15/2010
7/31/2011
9/30/2010
3/31/2011
9/30/2012

130.0
100.0
18.2
16.7
5.0
100.0
496.1

0.0
64.1
8.3
11.9
5.0
31.7
154.9

937.1

256.0

11
A. Activities of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in Nepal
Investment Services: As of end January 2010, the IFC’s outstanding balance portfolio in
Nepal is US$31.3 million in two power generation projects, one airline, one tourism project,
and three trade finance facilities. Given the political uncertainty and the state of transition
Nepal is going through, opportunities for investments remain limited. However, IFC is
considering new investments in hydropower, agri-business and the financial sector. In 2005,
IFC launched the Global Trade Finance Program (GTFP), which offers confirming banks
partial or full guarantees on issuing banks’ payment risk. In FY07, IFC signed two Nepali
Banks, Bank of Kathmandu and Nepal Industrial and Commercial Bank, to the GTFP (US$4
million each) and added Himalayan Bank in June 2009. One or two more banks are likely to
be added to the GTFP this year. The IFC is also considering equity investments in
commercial banks and microfinance institutions, and loans to agri-business and hydropower.
B. IFC Advisory Services
Privatization/Corporate Advisory Services: IFC’s main delivery mechanism for technical
assistance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Nepal is through the South Asia
Enterprise Development Facility (IFC-SEDF). This facility—funded by IFC in partnership
with Norway and the United Kingdom — delivers TA programs to increase access for SMEs
to financing and business development services, improve the business environment for SMEs
and develop linkages with larger enterprises. IFC will also provide technical assistance to the
poultry sector by strengthening the SMEs/ farmer linkages with large firm supply chains. On
the infrastructure side, IFC has initiated discussions with the GoN on providing advisory
services for a possible privatization/restructuring of Nepal Airlines, Kathmandu airport
international terminal and Nepal Telecom.
Access to Finance: IFC-SEDF had signed a Partner Financial Institution MOU with three
Banks - Himalayan Bank, NIC Bank and the Bank of Kathmandu in 2007 and hopes to sign
at least one more MoU soon. The MOUs outline specific programs to assist the banks with
institutional capacity building that will help enhance the quality of service to the bank’s SME
clients.
IFC is also helping strengthen the financial infrastructure through a Credit Bureau
Strengthening Project aimed at making the newly privatized Credit Bureaus commercially
viable and helping operationalize the Secured Transaction Registry. Future advisory work
with banks will include developing energy efficiency lending programs, and agribusiness risk
sharing financial instruments. IFC will also launch SME Venture Fund which will provide
capital and technical assistance to SMEs in agriculture, tourism and other sectors in Nepal.
Investment Climate Advisory: Investment Climate Reform program builds on the FIASSEDF Investment Climate Mini Diagnostic (February-March 2007) which uncovered
constraints to investment in terms of excessively rigid labor regulations, non-transparent and

12
inconsistent tax administration, and inefficient licensing regimes. At the institutional level,
the Study pointed out poor coordination among the agencies, as well as lack of PSD strategy
and reform mechanisms. Finally, the Study recommended beginning broad reforms by
establishing Special Economic Zones (SEZ) based on globally competitive legal and
regulatory regime.
Over 2008 and 2009, the Nepal Investment Climate Reform Program (ICRP, phase I) has (i)
raised awareness and support by the private sector associations and the relevant government
ministries to creation of Public-Private Dialogue (PPD), a results-focused mechanism for
identifying reforms and developing solutions; and further improved the draft SEZ framework
which currently awaits for the Constituent Assembly approval. Finally, IFC has raised
donor support to continue broad investment climate reforms in three key areas: (i)
strengthening Public-Private Dialogue on investment climate issues, (ii) Regulatory Reforms
to reduce the cost of doing business, and (iii) development of effective SEZ program
catalyzing FDI and domestic investment.
The Next Steps Include:
On PPD, operationalizing the mechanism and put in place effective Secretariat and the
Working Groups; on Regulatory Reforms, finalizing the scope of assistance and commence
specific diagnostic of business procedures and processes prioritized for reforms; on SEZ,
completing formulation of the regulatory regime following adoption of the SEZ Act, and
continue building institutional capacity of the SEZ Authority.
Questions on IDA may be referred to Ms. Paralkar (458–9050) or on the IFC to Mr. Paul
Barbour (473−7349).

13
ANNEX III. NEPAL—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Country Program
As of 31 December 2009, cumulative lending to Nepal was $2,972.150 million, comprising
117 sovereign loans ($2,422 million), 5 non sovereign loans ($50 million), and 16 ADF
grants ($495.650 million). Sectors covered through AsDB loans and grants are agriculture
and natural resources; education, energy, finance, public sector management (law, economic
and public policy), transport and ICT, water supply and other municipal infrastructure and
services and multisector. AsDB's total country program for Nepal in 2009 comprised a total
of $163.5 million in grants and $172.8 million in concessional loans, including the Education
Sector Cluster Program (subprogram. 3; loan: $25 million and grant: $70 million); Energy
Access and Efficiency Improvement Project I (loan: $65 million); Air Transport Capacity
Enhancement Project (loan: $70 million and grant: $10 million); Second Small Towns Water
Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (grant: $45.1 million); Emergency Flood Damages
Rehabilitation (grant: $25.6 million) and a national contribution to South Asia Tourism
Infrastructure Development Project (loan: $12.75 million and grant: $12.75 million). The
significant increase in the new commitment of loans and grants in 2009 was mainly due to
ADB's crisis response which allocated an additional $400 million of ADF to ADB's poorest
member countries, and additional ADF resources provided by the replenishment of ADF X.
Undisbursed funds of $717.03 million represent 63 percent of the total portfolio amount as of
31 December 2009.

14
Loans and Grants by the Asian Development Bank, 1969–2009
(As of 31 December 2009)
1968–2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
25
65
0
0
0
70
0

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Loans
Agriculture and natural resources
Education
Energy
Finance
Industry and trade
Public sector management
Transport and ICT
Water supply and other municipal
infrastructure and services
Multisector
Regional Cooperation
Total loans
Grants
Agriculture and natural resources
Education
Finance
Public sector management
Transport and ICT
Water supply and other municipal
infrastructure and services
Multisector
Regional Cooperation
Total grants
Total approved (loan and grant)
Gross disbursements
Technical Assistance
Total approved
Gross disbursements

656.23
61.1
364.4
7.3
129.18

0
30
0
0
0

236.86

0
19.6
0
0
0
30
46

0

20
0
0
0
0
35
0

70
20
0
0
0
0
20

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
30
0
56
0
0
0

224
127.06

0
0

0
30

39
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0

0

86

0

0

0
12.75
172.8

18
2
8.7
0
55.2

0
0
0
0
0

0
8
0
106.3
25
0

0
70
0
0
10
45.1

0
139.3
139.3
127.1

25.6
12.75
163.5
336.3
199.5

4.55
4.58

5.7
6.77

1,806.13
1,220.60

95.6
57.3

60
28.2

94
33.5

110
22

0
43.7

83.9
169.9
108.0

100
9
109
109
102.3

98.03
54.1

4.03
5

4.02
3.9

4.17
4.17

3.16
4.2

2.05
3.6

6.4
2.04

7.22
4.6

Technical Assistance

Since 1968, AsDB has provided Nepal with technical assistance in most sectors. As of 31
December 2009, ADB approved 288 technical assistance projects totaling $127.8 million.
There are currently 39 ongoing TAs, including 5 Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR)
projects.
Private Sector Operations
Developing a strong and dynamic private sector is essential to the long-term economic
growth of Nepal. AsDB aims to strengthen the role of the private sector in Nepal through
prudent investments in its infrastructure sector. The AsDB’s public sector lending and
technical assistance program have also been helping Nepal to create a more conducive policy
and legal environment for private sector development. At the end of 2009, cumulative
approvals for 4 private sector projects in Nepal amounted to $58.64 million while ADB’s
outstanding exposure to non-sovereign projects totaled $8.8 million, representing 0.2% of
ADB’s total non-sovereign portfolio.

15
APPENDIX IV: NEPAL—STATISTICAL ISSUES
Economic and financial data are generally adequate for surveillance, with scope for
improvement, in particular in the timeliness and coverage of fiscal data, and in balance of
payments compilation of remittances, and official and private financial flows. Nepal provides
core data to the Fund and releases data in government and central bank publications. It has
been a participant in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since May 2001.
Metadata were initially posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board in May 2001
and last updated in January 2009. A multisector statistics mission visited Kathmandu in
January 2001.
Real Sector Statistics
The Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) compiles national accounts using the methodology
of the 1993 SNA. Key estimates include GDP by industry (in current and constant prices) and
by expenditure categories (current prices), and gross national income and savings. There are
shortcomings due to lack of comprehensive and regular data sources. The limited source data
suffer from inconsistencies, lags in availability, and insufficient detail. There are also
shortcomings in record keeping by agencies, and access to records is not timely due to
processing lags. Reflecting source data problems, compilation methods rely heavily on fixed
ratios derived from surveys or ad hoc assumptions—for example, household consumption
expenditure estimates are based on extrapolations of the 2003/04 benchmark living standard
survey. STA missions in April 2005 and July 2006 provided support to the development of
quarterly national accounts (QNA) and the rebasing of the annual national accounts
to 2000/01 from 1994/95. These missions and other developments are within the context of a
broader Asian Development Bank (AsDB) project aimed at strengthening the national
accounts.
The consumer price index (CPI) offers limited coverage based on dated expenditure weights
derived from a 1995/96 household expenditure survey. Coverage is limited to urban areas
while the consumption basket refers to a subset of the population, excluding: the upper and
lower two income deciles; single person households; households with more than eight
persons; and households obtaining more than 50 percent of their consumption from own
production or less than 50 percent of their income in cash. The national index aggregates
regional indices using population weights rather than recommended expenditure weights.
The wholesale price index (WPI) was developed by the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) and first
published in July 2001. The weights for the WPI, based on 1999/2000 data, are derived using
a commodity flow approach with prices related to the first commercial transaction point.
CBS compilation methods need improvement to implement weekly or bi-weekly price
collection; the number of price quotations should be increased; and procedures for adjusting
for quality differences require implementation. The CBS, with STA assistance, is developing

16
a monthly producer price index (PPI) series, to replace the manufacturing price index,
which is based on unit values rather than actual transaction prices. The PPI is expected to
more accurately measure industrial sector inflation and improve deflation in the national
accounts..
Government Finance Statistics
A revised budget classification system, introduced in 2004/05 and subsequently refined, has
substantially improved fiscal statistics, in particular the division between current and capital
spending. However, fiscal data by functional and economic classification are provided on an
irregular basis with varying degrees of coverage. In addition, large amounts are still allocated
to the contingency account, and monthly reporting of development spending excludes
amounts directly paid by donors. Moreover, a number of fees collected outside the budget
and the operations of local governments are not reported in the annual budget.
More timely data on revenue and expenditure are needed for effective fiscal control. A
financial management project is underway and a system of ‘flash’ reporting covering selected
districts that account for the bulk of expenditure is being developed. Further improvement of
fiscal data collected by the Financial Comptroller General’s Office would permit the Ministry
of Finance (MoF) to monitor more effectively actual revenue collections and expenditures,
and to provide assessments during the course of the fiscal year. Such improvements will
require further computerization in MoF regional offices, as well as donor financing and
additional TA.
Consolidated accounts for the public enterprise sector are not compiled on a regular basis,
and financial reporting by many individual enterprises is subject to long delays. Fund staff
has assisted the authorities in processing surveys of public enterprises.
Government finance statistics are regularly reported for publication in the Government
Finance Statistics Yearbook, but not the International Finance Statistics.
Monetary and Financial Statistics
Monetary data provided to the Fund by the NRB have been subject to revisions with lags of
up to 12 months, complicating program monitoring. Monetary and financial statistics are
compiled under the methodology of the IMF’s 1984 Guide to Monetary and Financial
Statistics. To update the NRB’s compilation methods to the framework of Monetary and
Financial Statistics Manual, 2000 (MFSM), a 2008 STA mission recommended to:

17
(i) include development banks and finance companies in the institutional coverage of
monthly monetary statistics1 and, based on this expanded coverage, compile a monthly broad
money/depository corporations survey; (ii) adopt center of economic interest criteria for
classifying residents and nonresidents and for distinguishing resident/nonresident positions of
the financial institutions, instead of the currently used criteria based on citizenship and
currency of denomination; (iii) adopt the principle of effective control for distinguishing
between public and private nonfinancial corporations; (iv) ensure that the IMF-related
accounts are fully reflected in the NRB’s balance sheet in accordance with the IMF Finance
Department’s instructions; (v) value monetary gold, SDR holdings, securities, and holdings
of shares/equities based on the end-period fair value/market price; (vi) incorporate accruals in
the outstanding amount of financial asset or liability instead of maintaining them on separate
accounts; (vii) monitor activities of other, smaller deposit-taking institutions (namely, Postal
Savings Bank, Micro Credit Development Banks, Savings and Credit Cooperatives, Citizens’
Investment Trust) and include them in the institutional coverage of broad money/depository
corporations survey when their deposit-taking activities become more significant; (viii) use
Statement of Assets and Liabilities (Form No. 1), instead of the more aggregated set of data
currently used, as the basis for compiling monetary accounts for commercial banks,
development banks and finance companies; and (ix) start regular monthly reporting of
monetary data in the SRF format for the NRB (SRF-1SR) and other depository corporations
(SRF-2SR) based on the compilation system agreed with the mission.
External Sector Statistics
The NRB compiles and disseminates balance of payments statistics in conformity with the
fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Statistics Manuel (BPM5), but does not compile
statistics on the international investment position. Nepal has benefited from five STA balance
of payments missions since the multisector statistics mission of 2001. Staffing has been
increased and in September 2003, the authorities began disseminating balance of payments in
BPM5 format. Nevertheless, other STA recommendations have not yet been fully
implemented and net errors and omissions remain large. Work is still underway to improve
the estimation of workers’ remittances and the source data for private capital flows, but
further work is needed to improve the recording of oil transactions, grants, foreign direct
investment, short-term inflows, and other private capital flows.
Trade data compiled separately by the NRB, the Customs Department, and the Trade
Promotion Center (overseas trade only) exhibit discrepancies. Export and import price
indices are not compiled.
1

Data provided to the mission indicates that the ratio of deposits at development banks and finance companies
relative to total deposits at deposit-taking institutions was approximately 13 percent at end-2006/2007.

18

Incomplete and conflicting data on government external grants and loans complicate the
estimation of foreign financing. The NRB monitors cash disbursements and repayments, but
most commodity aid and direct payment are excluded. MoF reporting is also incomplete and
not timely. With technical assistance from the United Kingdom’s DFID, a new database with
comprehensive data on disbursements, repayments, and the stock of outstanding government
debt has been developed and is currently being refined. However, reporting of direct external
grants remains problematic.

19
Nepal—Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of March 25, 2010)

Date of
Latest
Observation

Date
Received

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

D and M

W and M

D and M

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

W

W

M

Reserve/base money

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Broad money

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Central bank balance sheet

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Consolidated balance sheet of the banking
system

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

W and M

W and M

W and M

Consumer price index

Feb. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition
3
4
of financing – general government

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

W

W

W

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition
3
of financing – central government

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

W

W

W

2008/09

Jan. 2010

A

A

A

External current account balance

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

Exports and imports of goods and services

Jan. 2010

Mar. 2010

M

M

M

2008

May 2009

A

A

A

2008/09

Jan. 2010

A

A

A

Exchange rates
International reserve assets and reserve
liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Interest rates

1

2

Stocks of central government and central
5
government-guaranteed debt

GDP/GNP
Gross external debt
1

Frequency
of

Frequency
of

Frequency
of

Data

Reporting

Publication

6

6

6

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and
bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds)
and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA).
2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
NEPAL
Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the staffs of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
Approved by Kalpana Kochhar and Christian Mumssen (IMF)
and Ernesto May and Sudarshan Gooptu (World Bank)
May 14, 2010
Nepal remains at moderate risk of debt distress. The risk rating is assessed using the LowIncome Country Debt Sustainability Analysis (LIC-DSA) framework and remittances have
been incorporated given their importance in the economy1. Despite a better starting point
compared to the previous DSA, the baseline is weaker due to a delayed impact of the global
crisis, limited progress in addressing structural impediments, and financial sector
vulnerabilities. In addition to standard stress tests, a financial stress scenario is generated to
reflect financial vulnerabilities and the associated risks. Though debt dynamics are resilient
to standard stress tests, debt indicators breach the thresholds for a sustained period under
the financial stress scenario.
The results highlight the need to contain risks arising from financial vulnerabilities. As a
consequence, the fiscal stance should remain tight in the short run, but could be more
accommodative in the medium term to support economic growth provided the financial
vulnerabilities are addressed. Moreover, stronger and more stable growth, combined with
foreign financing at favorable terms, would help Nepal make progress toward achieving its
MDG targets while containing risks to debt sustainability.
I. BACKGROUND
1.
Nepal’s total public debt stock is estimated at 40 percent of GDP at end 2008/09
(in nominal terms), having declined from 64 percent of GDP in 2001/02. In 2008/09,
external public debt was US$3.4 billion (27 percent of GDP), of which about US$3.1 billion
was owed to multilateral institutions, mostly IDA and the AsDB. The bilateral debt stock is
estimated at US$ 0.3 billion, with Japan representing the largest creditor accounting for about
three quarters. Domestic debt stood at around 13 percent of GDP, 4 percentage points lower
than in 2001/02.

1

The debt sustainability analysis is prepared together with the World Bank.

2
II. MACROECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS
2.
Baseline projections of public and publicly guaranteed debt (PPG) are based on
the following key assumptions:


Real sector: Real GDP growth is projected to decline to 3 percent in 2009/10, pick up
gradually to 4¾ percent over the medium term, and reach 5½ percent in the long run.
The projections are weaker than those in the previous DSA on account of a delayed
impact of the global crisis, limited progress in addressing structural impediments to
growth, and financial sector vulnerabilities. Removing or alleviating these obstacles
will require time but could set Nepal on a higher growth path. Inflation is assumed to
be about 12 percent in 2009/10 and gradually decline to 5 percent over the medium
term, in line with India’s inflation projection and anticipating somewhat higher
inflation in non-tradables as a result of remittances inflows. The exchange rate is
assumed to remain pegged to the Indian rupee at the current level over the projection
period.



Fiscal sector: The revenue-to-GDP ratio is projected to rise gradually from
14½ percent in 2008/09 to 17 percent in 2020/21 as there is still room for revenue
administration gains, stabilizing at that level thereafter. Official grants are projected
to decline gradually from 4 percent of GDP in 2008/09 to 3 percent in 2014/15 as
international assistance for the peace process unwinds. Expenditure as a share of GDP
is projected to rise from 19¾ percent in 2008/09 to around 23½ percent in the
medium term and beyond due to sound revenue performance and the need to improve
capital spending. As a result, the overall fiscal deficit (including grants) is projected
to rise gradually from 1½ percent of GDP in 2008/09 to 3½ percent of GDP in the
medium term, consistent with stability in the public debt-to-GDP ratio. Net domestic
financing is projected to increase from 1¾ percent of GDP in 2008/09 to about 2½ by
2014/15, stabilizing at that level thereafter.



External sector: Exports of goods and services are projected to grow at an average of
about 7 percent over the projection period supported by tourism and growth in partner
countries. After growing by over 30 percent annually in the past few years,
remittances are projected to slow and grow by an annual average of 12 percent over
the medium term, and by about 8 percent thereafter2. Imports of goods and services
are expected to grow by an average of about 8 percent over the projection period in

2

The projection of remittances is based on empirical study by IMF staff, which shows that the key determinants
of remittances are non-oil GDP growth of GCC countries and stock of migrant workers. Please refer to
“Remittances in South Asia and the Philippines: Determinants and Outlook”, Almekinders and Abenoja (2009).
In practice, however, additional factors such as host country immigration policy and migrants’ confidence in
Nepal’s economy might also matter.

3
line with economic activity and remittances. As a consequence, the current account
balance is projected to shift from a small surplus in previous years to a deficit of
2 percent of GDP in 2009/10, and gradually move close to balance in the long run.


Financial sector: The financial sector has overextended itself in recent years in an
environment of loose monetary policy, weak supervision, and proliferation of
financial institutions. Rapid credit growth has fueled asset price booms, rendering the
banking system subject to significant credit and liquidity risks. Moreover, two statecontrolled banks, accounting for one fifth of the system, are operating with significant
negative capital. Stress tests combined with costs of financial crises in other countries
suggest that contingent liabilities of a financial sector restructuring in Nepal could be
in the order of 8–12 percent of GDP.3



In sum, macroeconomic assumptions are weaker compared to the previous DSA,
mainly due to a delayed impact of the global crisis, heightened banking sector
weaknesses, and persistent structural impediments. Over the projection period,
average GDP growth is projected at 5 percent compared to 5½ in the previous DSA.
Average export growth is projected at 7 percent compared to 8 percent in the last
DSA, while average import growth is expected to remain close to the estimated
8 percent in the last DSA.



Consistent with the previous DSA, the grant element of new borrowing is projected to
decline gradually as Nepal begins to develop its hydropower potential partly with
commercial lenders, and new non-traditional donors increase assistance.
III. EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
A. Baseline

3.
Remittances are formally included in the DSA. In the previous DSA, remittances
were not included in the estimate of the indicative thresholds. However, workers’ remittances
in Nepal4 are relatively large in comparison to exports or GDP—equivalent to over
21 percent of GDP or three times the exports in 2008/09—and constitute a relatively stable
source of foreign exchange inflows. Therefore, in line with recent guidelines5, remittances
are added to exports and GDP as denominators in the calculation of debt burden ratios.
3

See Selected Issues Paper, An Analysis of Systemic Risks in Nepal’s Banking Sector in the Wake of the Global
Crisis.

4
5

Nepal is classified as a medium performer based on its three year average CPIA score during 2007–2009.

In reference to “Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability
Framework for Low-Income Countries” by the International Development Association and International
Monetary Fund.

4

4.
Under the baseline, Nepal’s external debt indicators are well below the indicative
thresholds6 (Table 3b and Figure 1). Long-term projections indicate that most ratios are set
to improve: the PV of external public debt-to-GDP-and-remittances is projected to decline
from 16 percent to 8 percent by 2029/30; the PV of external public debt-to-revenue is
projected to fall from 119 percent to 57 percent; and PV of external public debt-to-exportsand-remittances ratio is projected to decline from 63 percent to 41 percent.
Nepal: Indicative External Debt Burden Indicators

Indicative
Thresholds

Nepal:
2009/10

Nepal:
Projected
average
2009/102029/30

NPV of debt, in percent of
exports and remittances
GDP and remittances
revenue

135.0
36.0
250.0

63.3
16.0
119.4

41.3
10.3
74.8

Debt service, in percent of
exports and remittances
revenues

18.0
30.0

4.3
8.2

2.7
4.9

B. Stress Test and Alternative Scenario
5.
The DSA is resilient to standard stress tests. The standard shocks include slower
GDP growth, softer remittances and exports, lower US dollar GDP deflator and a one-time
exchange rate depreciation.6 Bound tests indicate that debt indicators do not breach the
thresholds except that the PV of debt-to-export-and-remittance ratio exceed the threshold for
one year only.
6.
The standard stress tests, however, do not capture Nepal’s structural
weaknesses, in particular the financial vulnerabilities and the associated risks and the
country’s dependence on remittances. Weaker remittances inflows could trigger balance of
payments shocks, expose banking sector weaknesses, impede growth, and exert pressures on
the exchange rate. Hence, an alternative scenario that combines a slowdown in remittances
and GDP growth, a 30 percent one-time exchange rate depreciation, and the potential cost of
financial sector restructuring is also presented. 7 The potential net fiscal costs of a financial
restructuring is estimated to be 8–12 percent of GDP. Under this scenario, the PV of debt-to6

The LIC-DSA framework compares debt burden indicators to indicative policy-based thresholds. The
thresholds are based on the empirical finding that low-income countries with stronger policies and institutions
tend to have a higher debt carrying capacity.

5
GDP-and-remittances ratio increases significantly, peaking at 47 percent in 2011/12 and
staying above the threshold for seven consecutive years (Figure 1); the PV of debt-to-revenue
ratio would breach the threshold for nine years, and PV of debt-to-exports-and-remittances
for four years. Under this country-specific scenario, the liquidity indicators, such as debt
service-to-revenue and debt-service-to-exports-and-remittances, remain below the thresholds.
IV. PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
7.
Under the baseline scenario, the PV of public debt-to-GDP ratio declines slightly
from 33 percent in 2009/10 to 31 percent by 2029/30 (Table 2a, Figure 2). Over the same
period, the PV of public debt-to-revenue ratio declines from 165 percent to 156 percent, and
the public debt service-to-revenue ratio declines from 12¾ percent to 12¼ percent. Unlike
the previous DSA that indicated further declines of these ratios, the current DSA expects
them to generally stabilize as the debt level has declined and fiscal space has been created,
which could accommodate a higher deficit. There is also room for a shift in the composition
of public debt towards more domestic debt because of a fairly large financial sector and
partially captive domestic market. The domestic component of public debt is projected to
increase from 40 percent of the total in 2009/10 to 61 percent in 2029/30.
8.
Stress tests suggest vulnerabilities to shocks. A shock modeled as real GDP growth
at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011–12 causes the PV of debt-to-GDP
ratio to increase from 32½ percent in 2009/10 to 38¼ percent in 2029/30; the PV of debt-torevenues ratio increases from 165 to 190½ percent; and the debt service-to-revenue ratio
increases from 12¾ percent to 19½ percent. The most extreme stress test in the medium-term
is a 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011, which causes the PV of
debt-to-GDP ratio to peak at 41½ percent in 2011 and stand at 37¾ percent in 2020, and the
PV of debt-to-revenue ratio to peak at 207¾ percent in 2011 and stand at 190¼ percent in
2020.
V. AUTHORITIES’ VIEW
9.
The authorities concurred with the overall assessment. They pointed out that the
inclusion of remittances in the analysis was highly appropriate given the important role they
play in the economy. They acknowledged the vulnerabilities of the financial sector, and the
associated risks to debt sustainability.

7

The shocks to GDP growth and current transfers are equivalent to the historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2011/12. The shock to exchange rate is a one-time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2011/12.

6
VI. CONCLUSION
10.
Nepal’s external debt dynamics are subject to a moderate risk of distress. While
with remittances formally included in the analysis, the baseline scenario is more favorable
than previously and debt burden indicators are well below the indicative thresholds, heighted
financial sector vulnerabilities and the potential fiscal costs of financial sector restructuring
add considerable risks. Both the baseline scenario and standard stress tests indicate resilient
debt dynamics in which debt indicators do not breach the thresholds on a sustained basis, but
they are likely to underestimate debt distress as the financial sector vulnerabilities and
associated risks are not captured.
11.
A country-specific scenario reflecting possible financial stress indicates sustained
breach of the indicative debt thresholds. The results highlight the weakness in debt
dynamics associated with financial vulnerabilities, which, if they were to materialize, could
bring about significant distress. As a consequence, Nepal’s fiscal policy stance should remain
tight in the short run, but could be more accommodative in the medium term to support
economic growth while maintaining sound debt dynamics provided financial sector
vulnerabilities are addressed. Moreover, stronger and more stable GDP growth combined
with foreign financing at favorable terms—preferably through grants—would help Nepal
make progress toward achieving its MDG targets while containing risks to debt
sustainability.
12.
A Fund-supported program may help reduce macroeconomic and financial
vulnerabilities and the ensuing threats to debt dynamics. The authorities have requested
Fund financial support under the Rapid Credit Facility to support reserves as they implement
policies to strengthen the financial sector and mitigate risks arising from the deceleration of
remittance inflows. Such policies would reduce the risk of the alternative financial stress
scenario materializing and thereby reduce threats to debt dynamics. Disbursement of Fund
resources of SDR 28.5million (($43.1 million) would have little impact on the baseline
scenario.

Table 1a.Nepal: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007-2030
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2007

2008

Estimate
2009

Average

Standard
Deviation

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Projections
2010-15
2015
Average

2020

2030

43.4
30.2

40.3
27.4

40.3
27.0

37.4
23.8

36.1
21.7

35.7
20.3

35.5
19.2

35.4
18.2

35.7
17.4

36.1
14.8

35.2
13.8

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

-6.6
-7.0
0.9
14.0
2.2
14.9
-7.9
-2.7
-1.0
-1.6
-5.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

-3.1
-1.2
1.3
15.3
2.5
16.6
-2.5
-3.0
-0.8
-2.2
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.9

0.0
-3.2
-0.6
16.9
2.5
16.3
-2.6
-3.0
-1.2
-1.8
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.2

-2.9
-2.6
1.6
19.9
3.8
21.5
-4.2
-2.0
-0.9
-1.2
-2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

-1.3
-0.4
1.4
20.0
4.0
21.4
-1.9
-1.4
0.0
-1.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.9

-0.4
0.1
1.6
20.0
3.8
21.6
-1.5
-1.2
0.3
-1.5
-0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

-0.2
0.2
1.8
20.0
3.6
21.8
-1.6
-1.3
0.2
-1.5
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

-0.1
0.3
2.0
19.8
3.3
21.9
-1.8
-1.6
0.0
-1.6
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

0.2
0.5
2.3
19.6
3.0
22.0
-1.8
-1.6
0.0
-1.6
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

0.0
0.0
2.1
19.9
3.0
22.0
-2.0
-1.6
0.1
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.0
2.2
20.0
3.0
22.2
-2.1
-1.7
0.1
-1.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

PV of public sector debt
o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
o/w external 3/
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/

…
…
...
...
4.6
…
…
…
26.5

…
…
...
...
4.1
…
…
…
18.4

35.0
21.8
21.8
...
2.2
207.0
243.1
150.9
16.2

32.9
19.2
19.2
...
4.1
164.8
203.9
119.4
12.8

32.5
18.1
18.1
...
4.3
162.3
202.9
113.2
14.2

32.4
17.1
17.1
...
4.4
162.2
200.2
105.6
14.0

32.5
16.2
16.2
...
4.5
162.6
198.3
98.9
13.6

32.5
15.3
15.3
...
4.7
164.1
196.8
92.7
13.2

32.8
14.5
14.5
...
5.0
166.8
196.9
87.2
13.6

32.4
11.2
11.2
...
4.7
163.1
192.1
66.3
13.2

31.1
9.7
9.7
...
4.6
155.6
183.1
56.9
12.2

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

31.4
7.5

22.0
4.4

19.0
-0.5

15.8
4.4

17.7
2.8

17.3
2.0

16.6
1.9

15.9
2.1

16.0
2.1

15.6
2.0

14.3
2.1

3.3
1.3
-2.8
-15.4
7.7
0.2
...

5.3
1.2
-2.4
1.8
6.7
0.2
...

4.7
1.1
-7.3
1.3
13.2
0.0
...

3.0
1.2
-6.2
-8.3
11.8
0.4
43.9

4.0
1.2
0.8
...
8.0
0.0
43.9

4.2
1.2
2.2
...
5.6
0.1
43.8

4.4
1.3
1.8
...
5.0
0.1
43.8

4.7
1.3
0.9
...
5.0
0.1
43.8

4.8
1.3
0.9
...
5.0
0.1
43.7

5.0
1.2
1.0
...
5.0
0.1
43.6

5.5
1.2
1.0
...
5.0
0.1
43.2

0.7

1.2

1.8

2.1

7

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2016-30
Average

Other Sustainability Indicators

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

4.1
1.3
-0.6
-2.0
5.9
0.1
…

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

1.7
0.1
3.3
5.9
3.1
0.1
…

4.2
1.3
0.1
...
6.7
0.1
43.8

5.3
1.2
1.0
...
5.0
0.1
...

8
Table 2a.Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2010-2030

2010

2011

2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

2020

2030

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

33

32

32

32

33

33

32

31

33
33
33

32
33
33

31
32
33

30
32
33

29
32
34

29
32
34

25
29
36

20
26
42

33
33
33
33
33

33
33
33
41
42

34
33
33
41
41

35
33
33
40
41

35
33
33
40
40

36
33
34
39
40

38
33
35
36
38

38
31
35
32
34

165

162

162

163

164

167

163

156

165
165
165

159
163
163

155
162
164

151
162
166

148
161
169

145
161
173

122
147
181

98
131
206

165
165
165
165
165

166
165
163
205
208

170
166
163
203
207

173
166
164
201
203

177
167
167
200
204

183
170
172
200
204

188
165
173
182
190

190
157
172
161
169

13

14

14

14

13

14

13

12

13
13
13

14
14
14

14
14
14

11
14
14

10
13
14

8
13
15

1
9
17

0
7
23

13
13
13
13
13

14
14
14
16
14

14
14
14
17
17

15
15
13
17
45

16
15
12
18
17

17
15
14
19
34

19
14
15
19
16

20
12
16
17
15

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Table 3a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007-2030 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Historical 0 Standard
Average 0 Deviation

Actual
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

32.8
30.2
-5.3
-4.6
-0.3
20.4
13.9
34.3
-19.1
-2.1
-1.5
-0.1
-4.3
0.4
-1.1
-3.6
-0.7
0.0
...
...
...
...
...
12.5
12.5
14.7
0.4
5.0

29.6
27.4
-3.3
-8.7
-3.0
19.3
12.0
31.3
-21.1
-2.2
-1.2
0.0
-5.6
0.3
-1.4
-4.4
5.4
0.0
...
...
...
...
...
11.2
11.2
10.5
0.1
0.2

29.4
27.0
-0.2
-4.5
-4.5
22.5
12.6
35.1
-25.6
-2.6
-1.5
-0.2
0.2
0.3
-1.4
1.3
4.3
0.0
24.2
192.2
21.8
172.9
150.9
9.5
9.5
8.3
-0.2
-4.3

26.0
23.8
-3.4
1.1
1.8
28.6
10.3
38.9
-25.5
-4.1
-1.4
-0.2
-0.4
0.3
-0.7
…
-4.5
0.0
21.5
208.2
19.2
186.4
119.4
12.8
12.8
8.2
0.7
5.2

24.1
21.7
-2.0
-1.2
-0.3
27.8
10.4
38.2
-26.7
-4.3
-1.4
-0.2
-0.7
0.3
-1.0
…
-0.8
0.0
20.4
196.1
18.1
173.7
113.2
12.2
12.2
8.0
0.5
1.7

22.7
20.3
-1.4
-1.1
-0.1
28.5
10.4
38.9
-27.2
-4.0
-1.3
-0.3
-0.7
0.3
-1.0
…
-0.3
0.0
19.4
186.7
17.1
164.3
105.6
11.9
11.9
7.6
0.5
1.3

21.5
19.2
-1.1
-0.7
0.3
29.3
10.3
39.6
-27.6
-3.8
-1.3
-0.3
-0.7
0.3
-0.9
…
-0.5
0.0
18.5
180.2
16.2
157.7
98.9
11.5
11.5
7.2
0.6
1.5

20.5
18.2
-1.1
-0.2
0.9
30.0
10.1
40.1
-27.9
-3.5
-1.3
-0.4
-0.7
0.3
-0.9
…
-0.9
0.0
17.6
174.6
15.3
151.9
92.7
11.4
11.4
6.9
0.7
2.0

19.6
17.4
-0.8
0.2
1.2
30.4
9.9
40.3
-28.0
-3.2
-1.2
-0.4
-0.7
0.2
-0.9
…
-1.0
0.0
16.7
170.0
14.5
147.3
87.2
11.2
11.2
6.6
0.9
2.1

3.3
10.5
1.3
20.6
27.8
...
11.8
0.2
0.2
0.0
...
...

5.3
15.7
1.2
5.4
11.2
...
12.8
0.3
0.3
0.0
...
...

4.7
-4.2
1.1
4.9
12.5
...
14.4
0.3
0.3
0.0
...
...

3.0
13.3
1.2
-4.3
29.3
43.9
16.1
0.7
0.6
0.1
4.4
85.7

4.0
2.1
1.2
7.3
4.2
43.9
16.0
0.8
0.6
0.2
4.6
84.8

4.2
2.8
1.2
7.1
9.2
43.8
16.2
0.8
0.6
0.2
4.5
84.2

4.4
2.9
1.3
6.0
9.4
43.8
16.4
0.8
0.6
0.2
4.3
83.6

4.7
2.9
1.3
5.8
9.3
43.8
16.5
0.8
0.6
0.2
3.9
82.6

4.8
3.5
1.3
5.9
8.8
43.7
16.6
0.9
0.6
0.2
3.7
80.6

10.3
14.2

12.6
21.8

12.6
0.2
2.7

14.7
16.7
2.8
0.2
3.0
16.0
63.3
4.3

15.6
6.2
2.8
0.3
3.3
14.9
57.1
4.0

16.8
7.2
2.8
0.3
3.7
14.0
52.4
3.8

18.0
7.5
2.9
0.3
4.1
13.2
48.8
3.6

19.4
7.8
2.9
0.3
4.6
12.4
45.4
3.4

21.1
8.4
3.0
0.4
5.1
11.7
42.6
3.2

-3.3

1.5

-17.7

3.6

0.0

0.1

4.1
4.8
1.3
3.8
11.4
...

1.7
6.5
0.1
14.2
10.9
...

2010-2015
Average

2020

2030

16.8
14.8
-0.4
-1.4
-0.3
26.8
8.7
35.5
-26.3
-3.1
-0.8
-0.5
-0.6
0.2
-0.8
…
1.0
0.0
13.2
152.5
11.2
129.4
66.3
8.3
8.3
4.2
0.6
0.0

15.4
13.8
0.0
-1.5
-0.2
19.3
7.0
26.3
-19.1
-3.0
-0.4
-0.7
-0.6
0.2
-0.8
…
1.5
0.0
11.2
160.7
9.7
138.3
56.9
6.9
6.9
2.8
0.9
-0.1

5.0
5.0
1.2
7.3
7.3
43.6
16.9
1.4
1.0
0.4
3.7
79.6

5.5
5.0
1.2
8.7
7.5
43.2
17.0
4.0
2.8
1.2
3.8
78.0

33.9
10.3
3.8
0.7
7.8
9.1
35.2
2.3

93.1
10.8
9.0
1.0
15.4
8.3
41.1
2.0

2016-2030
Average

0.0

-23.8

-0.6

9

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing
PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Projections

2007

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross remittances (Billions of US dollars)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittances)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1.5
...
...
...

2.1
...
...
...

2.7
17.9
63.8
3.5

4.2
4.6
1.3
4.6
11.7
43.8

9.0
0.3

0
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

5.3
4.9
1.2
7.9
7.3
43.5
16.9

3.8
79.1

10.4
0.8

10
Table 3b.Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2010-2030
(In percent)
Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2020

2030

16

15

14

13

12

12

9

8

16
16
16

13
15
35

11
15
47

8
14
46

6
14
45

3
13
43

0
12
33

0
14
18

16
16
16
16
16
16

15
16
15
23
23
19

14
16
15
29
29
18

13
15
14
25
26
17

13
14
13
24
24
16

12
13
12
22
23
15

9
10
10
17
17
12

8
9
9
11
11
11

63

57

52

49

45

43

35

41

63
63
63

50
58
115

40
55
154

31
52
149

21
50
145

12
48
139

0
47
112

0
67
77

63
63
63
63
63
63

56
63
56
117
114
56

52
67
52
147
150
52

48
62
48
92
96
48

45
58
45
87
89
45

42
54
42
81
84
42

35
44
35
66
68
35

41
47
41
53
54
41

119

113

106

99

93

87

66

57

119
119
119

98
115
262

79
110
357

60
106
347

41
102
337

23
99
323

0
89
239

0
93
122

119
119
119
119
119
119

113
118
116
159
159
158

108
122
113
199
206
148

101
114
106
187
194
138

94
107
99
176
183
129

89
101
93
166
173
121

68
76
71
124
129
93

58
59
61
73
76
80

PV of debt-to-GDP+remittances ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Financial Sector Stress Scenario
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

PV of debt-to-exports+remittances ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Financial Sector Stress Scenario
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Financial Sector Stress Scenario
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

11
Table 3b.Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2010-2030 (continued)
(In percent)
Debt service-to-exports+remittances ratio
Baseline

4

4

4

4

3

3

2

2

4
4
4

4
4
5

4
4
5

3
4
6

3
4
6

3
4
5

2
3
4

0
3
5

4
4
4
4
4
4

4
4
4
6
6
4

4
4
4
6
6
4

4
4
4
4
4
4

3
4
3
4
4
3

3
4
3
4
4
3

2
3
2
3
3
2

2
2
2
3
3
2

8

8

8

7

7

7

4

3

8
8
8

8
8
11

7
8
13

6
7
13

6
7
13

5
7
12

3
5
8

0
5
8

8
8
8
8
8
8

8
8
8
8
8
11

8
8
8
8
9
11

7
8
8
9
9
10

7
7
8
8
9
10

7
7
7
8
8
9

4
4
5
5
5
6

3
3
3
4
4
4

41

41

41

41

41

41

41

41

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Financial Sector Stress Scenario
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Financial Sector Stress Scenario
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

12
Figure 1. Nepal: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
under Alternative Scenarios, 2010-2030 1/
a. Debt Accumulation

44

50

5

44

45

5

44

40

4

44

35

4

44

4

44

4

43

4

43

3

43

15

3

43

10

43

5

5

3
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Rate of Debt Accumulation

b.PV of debt-to-GDP+remittances ratio

30
25
20

0
2010

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

2015

2020

2025

2030

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

c.PV of debt-to-exports+remittances ratio

180
160

350

140

300

120

250

100

200

80

150

60
40

100

20

50

0
2010

20

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

400

2015

2020

2025

2030

e.Debt service-to-exports+remittances ratio

0
2010

2020

2025

2030

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

35

18

2015

30

16
14

25

12

20

10
15

8
6

10

4

5

2

0

0
2010

2015
Baseline

2020

2025

Historical scenario

2030
Most extreme shock 1/

2010

2015
Threshold

2020

2025

Financial Sector Stress Scenario

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2020. In figure b. it corresponds to a
Combination shock; in c. to a Combination shock; in d. to a Combination shock; in e. to a Terms shock and in figure f.
to a One-time depreciation shock

2030

13

Figure 2.Nepal: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2010-2030 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Non-debt flows

Historical scenario

45
40

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

250

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
200

150

100

50

0
2010

2012

2014

2016

25

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
20

15

10

5

0
2010

2012

2014

2016

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2020.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
NEPAL
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and
Request for Disbursement Under the Rapid Credit Facility
Supplementary Information
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Kalpana Kochhar and Christian Mumssen
May 25, 2010

1.
Fund staff has determined that Nepal maintains an exchange restriction subject
to Article VIII, arising from quantitative limits on the availability of foreign exchange
for leisure travel abroad. On April 2, 2010, to protect the balance of payments position, the
Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) limited the use of the Passport Facility—through which residents
can obtain foreign exchange for leisure travels up to US$ 2000—to no more than two times
per year. The limit on the amount of foreign exchange that can be obtained is further reduced
to US$1,000 for travelers to Tibet of China and SAARC countries (excluding India). The
current policy of the NRB is not to provide foreign exchange beyond these limits even if the
bona fide nature of the request is proved. These limits constitute an exchange restriction
inconsistent with Nepal’s obligations under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles.
2.
Approval of retention of this restriction is not recommended by the staff. Since
the restriction is discriminatory among Fund members given that there are two different
monetary limits, the staff does not recommend approval of this restriction.
3.
Further information is needed to clarify the jurisdictional implications of several
other exchange measures. These measures include the foreign exchange facilities for
entrepreneurs and students, and a potential multiple currency practice.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/75
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 17, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with Nepal
On May 28, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Nepal.1
Background
Four years after the end of the civil conflict, Nepal remains in political transition, with a new
constitution being drafted and fresh elections expected once the constitution is approved.
Despite being one of the poorest countries in Asia, Nepal is making progress on social
outcomes.
Macroeconomic stability has been maintained in the past few years, but the global crisis is
having a delayed impact on Nepal’s economy and exposing its structural weaknesses. The
exchange rate peg and prudent fiscal policy have been anchors of stability. By end 2008/092,
public debt had declined to 40 percent of GDP from 64 percent in 2001/02, and foreign
exchange reserves had increased to 6 months of import cover due to robust remittance inflows.
In the first half of 2009/10, however, remittances growth slowed and exports declined by 14
percent which combined with soaring imports caused reserves to decline by about 13 percent. A
liquidity crunch ensued in the banking system as banks have overextended themselves over the
past years in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, weak supervision, and
proliferation of financial institutions.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.
2
Nepal’s fiscal year begins in July.

2
The near-term economic outlook is challenging. Real GDP growth is expected to slow to
3 percent in 2009/10 from an estimated 4¾ percent in 2008/09, due to a poor monsoon, softer
remittances, and tighter monetary conditions. The external current account is projected to
record a deficit of 2 percent of GDP in 2009/10 due to a deteriorating trade deficit and
decelerating remittances. At the same time, inflation is projected at 12 percent by end 2009/10.
Fiscal policy remains prudent, and the authorities plan to reduce the 2009/10 net domestic
financing to 1.6 percent of GDP from the budgeted 2.1 percent. However, capital spending
remains low, owing mainly to capacity constraints. It is anticipated that real GDP growth will
recover to 4 percent in 2010/11 reflecting expected stronger remittances on the back of the
recovery in the Gulf countries and Malaysia (the main host countries of Nepalese workers) and
that the current account will move close to balance, although the situation remains fragile.
In the near term, risks are on the downside and stem mainly from weaker remittances,
continued high imports, capital flight, heightened financial sector vulnerabilities, and political
instability. Credit and liquidity risks in the banking system are high. Tackling structural problems
remains essential to achieve high growth over the medium term. While Nepal’s potential is high,
progress is required in addressing the poor business climate, power shortages, inadequate
infrastructure, weak governance, and difficult labor relations. Political stability and improved
security are necessary conditions for progress in several of these areas.
Against this background, the 2010 Article IV consultation focused on (i) maintaining continued
macroeconomic stability in the context of a deteriorating external position and how Fund
financial assistance could contribute to this end; and (ii) managing financial sector risks and
reducing vulnerabilities.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that, after years of macroeconomic stability, Nepal’s economy is
experiencing a substantial, albeit somewhat delayed, impact of the global crisis, which is
exposing the country’s structural weaknesses. External and financial sector risks have risen as
evidenced by the significant deterioration of the current account, the reserve decline, wavering
confidence, and banking sector liquidity stress.
Against this background, Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment and efforts to
safeguard external and financial stability. They viewed maintaining the exchange rate peg as a
key short-term objective to shore up confidence, observing that it has served Nepal well so far
by providing macroeconomic stability. In the medium term, a number of Directors recommended
a reconsideration of the type of peg as well as alternative options for a nominal anchor.
Directors stressed the need for monetary policy to support the peg by maintaining short-term
interest rates above those of India, and suggested that liquidity management be strengthened to
avoid abrupt fluctuations in interest rates. They also stressed that emergency liquidity support
needs to be consistent with the peg. Directors encouraged the authorities to phase out the
import and foreign exchange restrictions.
Directors took note of significant credit and liquidity risks in the financial sector. They welcomed
the recent macroprudential measures adopted by the Nepal Rastra Bank to limit banks’ liquidity
risk and exposure to the real estate sector, but stressed that enforcement will be crucial for their
effectiveness. Directors encouraged the authorities to strengthen the bank resolution

3
framework, including through the passage of the amended Banks and Financial Institutions Act,
enhance contingency planning, and expand regulatory oversight over savings and credit
cooperatives.
Directors noted that bank licensing policy needs to be tightened and financial sector
consolidation facilitated. They observed that the rapid proliferation of financial institutions has
stretched the authorities’ supervisory capacity, and welcomed the recent licensing moratorium.
Directors also encouraged the authorities to proceed with the restructuring of the two statecontrolled banks.
Directors commended the authorities’ fiscal prudence, and supported its continuation. They
noted that, although improved debt dynamics have created room for higher spending, a tight
fiscal stance remains justified in the short term to support the exchange rate peg. They
encouraged further efforts to curb tax evasion and broaden the tax base.
Directors reiterated that tackling long-standing structural problems remains essential to achieve
high growth over the medium term. Key areas for improvement are the business climate,
governance, infrastructure and labor relations.
Directors viewed the arrangement under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) as helpful in cushioning
the shock from the global crisis and boosting confidence. They hoped that the RCF would serve
as a bridge to a program addressing Nepal’s structural challenges that could be supported by
an arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4
Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2010/11
2006/07

Output and prices (percent change)
Real GDP
CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)

2008/09

2009/10 2010/11
Projections

(Percent change)
3.3
6.4
5.1

Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall deficit before grants
Overall deficit after grants
Net domestic financing

2007/08

5.3
7.7
12.1

4.7
13.2
11.4

3.0
11.8
12.1

4.0
8.0
6.0

19.9
22.4
15.1
7.2
6.2
2.4
2.1

20.0
22.8
15.6
7.2
6.8
2.8
2.2

(In percent of GDP)
14.0
15.9
10.6
5.3
4.1
1.9
1.6

Money and credit (percent change)

15.3
17.4
11.2
6.2
4.6
2.1
1.9

16.9
17.2
11.8
5.4
2.7
0.2
0.8

(Percent change, end-of-period)

Broad money
Domestic credit
Private sector credit

14.0
12.0
12.3

Balance of payments

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise
indicated)

Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In percent of GDP
Trade Balance (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In percent of GDP
Exports value growth (percent change)
Imports value growth (percent change)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of imports of goods and services

25.3
19.8
24.3

27.7
26.6
28.3

10.6
18.2
19.4

..
..
..

-13.8
-0.1
-1,977
-19.1
13.4
25.8
1,996
6

344.0
2.7
-2,265
-18.0
-4.6
8.4
2,473
7

536.3
4.3
-2,707
-21.5
0.5
14.1
2,907
6

-305.8
-2.1
-3,890
-26.4
-11.0
30.0
2,670
5

-0.3
0.0
-3,980
-25.5
6.3
3.0
2,876
5

30.2

27.4

27.0

23.8

21.7

728.2
70.5

818.4
65.0

969.8
76.9

1,116.1
…

1,254.1
…

9.5

-4.3

7.3

…

…

Memorandum items
Public external debt (percent of GDP)
GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese
rupees)
Exchange rate (Nrs/US$; period average)
Real effective exchange rate (eop, y/y percent
change)

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

Press Release No. 10/219
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 28, 2010

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves US$ 42.05 Million Disbursement Under
Rapid Credit Facility for Nepal
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today approved a
disbursement of an amount equivalent to SDR 28.52 million (about US$ 42.05 million) under
the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) for Nepal to help address the economic impact of the global
economic crisis. The Board’s approval enables the immediate disbursement of the full
amount.
Nepal has been hit hard, albeit with some time lag, by the recent global economic downturn.
The country is experiencing a significant decline in exports, a sharp slowdown in remittances
and a worsening of economic confidence, which has contributed to a large deterioration in
the current account balance and a decline in international reserves as well as a liquidity
crunch in the banking sector. The RCF for Nepal aims at addressing external and financial
risks and helping catalyze possible donor support.
The RCF, which provides a rapid and flexible financial assistance for low-income countries
that face an urgent balance of payments need, does not require any explicit program-based
conditionality or review, but economic policies are expected to address the underlying
balance of payments difficulties and support policy objectives including macroeconomic
stability and poverty reduction. Financing under the RCF carries a zero interest rate, has a
grace period of 5½ years, and a final maturity of 10 years.
The Executive Board also concluded the 2010 Article IV consultation with Nepal today. A
Public Information Notice will be published in due course.
Following the Executive Board’s discussion on Nepal, Mr. Naoyuki Shinohara, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Nepal is facing considerable external and financial risks. A substantial, albeit delayed,
impact of the global crisis has led to a significant deterioration of the current account, a

2

loss of international reserves, and a liquidity crunch in the banking sector. The external
shock exposed the country’s structural weaknesses, its reliance on remittances, and the
build-up of risks in the financial sector.
“The government’s policy program, supported by the IMF, is aimed at addressing these
risks and stabilizing international reserves. At the core of the program are a tight
monetary and fiscal policy stance to support the exchange rate peg, which remains
Nepal’s anchor for macroeconomic stability, and efforts to improve financial sector
soundness.
“The Nepal Rastra Bank has taken steps to tighten monetary policy through, inter alia,
raising the Standing Liquidity Facility rate. Building on a strong track record of fiscal
prudence, including during the political transition, the government has committed to
maintaining the domestically financed budget deficit close to 2 percent of GDP in the
2010/11 budget. The authorities have introduced macro prudential measures to limit
banks’ liquidity risk and exposure to the real estate sector, and imposed a partial bank
licensing moratorium. They are also committed to strengthening supervision, enhancing
contingency planning, encouraging financial sector consolidation, and reforming the two
state-owned banks.
“The authorities’ program is strong and well focused. If fully implemented and provided
the external situation improves as envisaged, it is expected to restore Nepal’s
macroeconomic stability and lay more favorable conditions for higher growth and
poverty reduction. This program could also serve as a bridge to a successor Fund
arrangement, which would help address the country’s structural challenges.”

Statement by Adrian Chua, Alternate Executive Director for Nepal
and Nara Thapa, Advisor to Executive Director
May 28, 2010
1.

Since the last Article IV consultation in March 2008, significant political
developments have taken place within Nepal and a severe economic crisis has
unfolded at the global level. The interim government formed after the end of the
decade-long civil conflict successfully conducted the constituent assembly (CA)
elections in April 2008. The first meeting of the CA ended the more than two-century
old monarchy. The two-year term for CA is almost complete and the writing of the
new constitution is underway. Political parties are holding dialogues on key issues.
The authorities are confident that differences on major constitutional issues will be
resolved, and the drafting of the constitution will be completed soon.
Macroeconomic situation and outlook

2.

Notwithstanding the decade-long civil conflict and political transition, Nepal has so
far maintained macroeconomic stability. Prudent macroeconomic policies
implemented under the recent PRGF-supported Fund program, the final review of
which was successfully concluded in November 2007, played a significant role in
underpinning macroeconomic stability. Economic growth, albeit modest, was
maintained. Inflation remained largely stable. Backed by strong remittances, the
accumulation of international reserves was at a comfortable level, which ensured the
overall macroeconomic and external stability.

3.

The adverse global economic environment has now affected the Nepali economy,
raising risks for macroeconomic stability. Economic growth is expected to decelerate
from 4.7 percent in 2008/09 to less than 4 percent in 2009/10 on account of poor
agricultural performance. Average inflation is projected to hover around 10.7percent,
reflecting the global price developments especially price movement in India. The
overall balance of payments position has slipped into a deficit on account of a
widening current account deficit, putting pressures on international reserves. The
delayed impact of the global economic crisis has resulted in a significant decline in
merchandise exports and slowdown in remittances. A deficit in the balance of
payments has also caused liquidity shortages, posing risks to the financial sector
stability. The authorities are facing the challenges of ensuring the external sector
stability and strengthening the financial sector stability amid fluid political transition.
Request for a disbursement under the RCF

4.

Against this backdrop, the authorities are requesting a disbursement under the Rapid
Credit Facility (RCF) in an amount equivalent to SDR 28.52 million (40 percent of
quota). The authorities hope that the proposed arrangement with the Fund will help

2
bridge the external financing gap and will also play a catalytic role in mobilizing
donor support for meeting Nepal’s development needs. The authorities expect that the
arrangement with the Fund will help safeguard the financial sector stability and
stabilize the overall macroeconomic situation. The RCF is considered as a bridge to
an ECF under which the authorities plan to initiate structural reforms aimed at
accelerating economic growth and alleviating poverty.
Monetary and exchange rate policy
5.

The authorities are focused on keeping the monetary policy tight and modulating
liquidity, aiming to contain inflation and balance of payments deficit. The authorities
also view the currency peg with the Indian rupee as fundamental to economic stability
and take it as an overall anchor for the conduct of monetary policy in Nepal.
Notwithstanding the current level of the peg remaining unchanged since 1993 and the
Nepali rupee in real terms appearing slightly overvalued on account of some price
and productivity differential with India, the authorities have no intention to change
the level of the peg in the current macroeconomic and political situation.

6.

To achieve these objectives and smoothen the credit crunch situation, the authorities
have rationalized policy instruments in the recent mid-term monetary policy review.
Market-based open market operations continue to be the primary tools for the short
term liquidity management. The authorities have extended the term of repo
transaction from 28 days to 45 days and have allowed commercial banks’ call
deposits to be counted for statutory liquidity ratio (SLR). With a view to ensure
credit availability to productive sector amid tights liqudity condition the refinancing
facility window has been introduced. This will help avail credit to export, power and
tourism sector. The new refinancing provision has been taken as booster for sagging
confidence in the financial market. As the refinancing facility has been limited for a
maximum period of six months, it is likely to ease liquidity squeeze in the short term
and prevent banks for using it on a long-term basis. Penal interest rates are applied on
the standing liquidity facility (SLF) to prevent banks from using the emergency
liquidity facility excessively. The authorities consider the current tighter liquidity
situation as temporary arisen on account of slowdown in remittances and a higher rate
of credit growth than deposit. Once the growth in remittances recovers and the credit
growth is reined in, the authorities expect the pressure on liquidity to ease soon.

3
Financial sector reforms
7.

The authorities are aware of both opportunities and challenges arising from the rapid
growth of the banking sector. Aided by a rapid growth in remittances, the recent
development of the banking sector has deepened the financial system in Nepal.
Excluding the two state controlled banks, namely Nepal Bank Limited (NBL) and
Rastriya Banijya Bank (RBB), capital adequacy ratio for private banks has remained
above 12 percent; non-performing loans have come down to 3.4 percent and the
profitability of banks as reflected by return to asset ratio is relatively high.

8.

However, the authorities are cognizant that the proliferation of banks has
overstretched the supervisory capacity of the central bank. The authorities are also
aware of risks that high credit-to-deposit ratios and significant exposure to real estate
pose to the financial sector stability. The authorities have taken a serious note of the
recent stress test results showing high vulnerability to credit and liquidity risks. The
authorities will continue to assess the health of the financial sector through stress
tests.

9.

In response to these emerging risks, the authorities have recently adopted a number
of prudential measures aimed at stabilizing the financial sector. The authorities have
imposed a moratorium on license applications while they review the licensing policy.
However, the authorities have eased the moratorium with respect to micro finance
banks and development banks with a view to expanding banking services to the rural
areas. To further improve the health of the financial sector, the authorities have also
adopted a number of macro-prudential measures recently. To address the excessive
leverage built up in recent times, the authorities have directed banks to gradually
lower the credit-deposit ratio to 80 percent over the medium term. To prevent asset
prices from building further and rein in the credit expansion to the real estate, the
limit on loan-to-value has been fixed at 60 percent of fair market value of collateral.
Likewise, the authorities have also planned to lower the single borrower limit from 50
percent to 25 percent of capital with effect from January 2011. Regarding sectoral
exposure of credit to real estate and housing loans, a limit has been fixed at 40
percent of total loans in real estate and housing loans.

10.

While the two large government controlled commercial banks have been put under
the outside management with the financial assistance from the World Bank, the
central bank has also started restructuring some private sector banks. While Nepal
Development Bank has been liquidated, the central bank has completed the process of
restructuring Nepal Bangladesh Bank. To put in place the bank resolution
framework, the authorities have readied the amended Banks and Financial Institutions
Act (BAFIA) for parliamentary approval. As for the contingency planning for the
financial sector, the authorities are seeking technical assistance from the World Bank.

4
11.

The authorities consider that a strong international reserve position is key to financial
sector stability. Hence, the authorities have taken strong measures to strengthen the
balance of payments position. In an effort to safeguard foreign exchange resources,
the authorities have raised margin requirements as well as quantitative limits on gold
and silver imports. With a view to preventing capital flight, the authorities have
temporarily limited the availability of passport facility for leisure travel to twice a
year and $2000 per transaction. The authorities are committed to relaxing such
restriction by March 2011 when the balance of payments situation is expected to turn
around.
Fiscal policy

12.

Despite the difficult political situation, the authorities are committed to maintaining
fiscal discipline. Notwithstanding pressures on peace-related expenditures and wages,
the overall public expenditure has been contained. Although capital spending has
remained lower than expected, the authorities have maintained social spending
resulting in relatively improved social indicators.

13.

In the face of a relatively lower level of economic growth, revenue collection has
been accelerated from 10.7 percent in 2005/06 to 14.5 percent of GDP in 2008/09. A
significant rise in imports fueled by substantial growth in remittances has boosted
revenue. A number of revenue administration reforms aimed at broadening tax base
and reducing tax evasion have also contributed to the growth in revenue. The
authorities also appreciate the technical assistance they have received from the Fund
on public financial management.

14.

As a result of these developments, domestic financing of budget deficit is projected to
remain at 1.6 percent and overall budget deficit to hover around 2 percent of GDP.
The prudent management of public finances in Nepal has led to a gradual reduction in
debt level from 64 percent in 2002/03 to 40 percent of GDP in 2008/09. This not only
has reduced debt risks and made the public debt sustainable but also has created a
fiscal space for social and physical capital spending going forward.
Structural reforms

15.

Nepal has a track record of structural reforms relating to government finance, public
enterprises and financial sector during the earlier Fund programs. Given the national
focus on drafting a new constitution and taking forward the peace process to its
logical conclusion, it has been difficult to initiate structural reforms further. The
authorities consider structural reforms pertaining to public enterprises especially the
Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) are key to streamlining public resources for
accelerating economic growth and reducing poverty. The authorities look forward to
implementing a medium term Fund program as the political situation stabilizes with
the completion of the peace process and the promulgation of a new constitution.

5
Conclusion
16.

The authorities express their commitment to adopting prudent macroeconomic
policies and seek the support of Board members for their request for a disbursement
under the RCF. The authorities broadly share the staff analysis and accept the policy
advice as presented in the Article IV report. We wish to thank the mission team for
constructive dialogues they had in Kathmandu during February 24- March 8, 2010.

17.

The authorities consent to the publication of the staff report and the letter of intent.

