July 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/179

© 2011 International Monetary Fund

June 15, 2011
May 20, 2011

June 29, 2001
June 15, 2001
2011
January 29, 2001

Bulgaria: 2011 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Bulgaria
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2011 Article IV consultation with Bulgaria, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2011 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 20, 2011, with the officials of Bulgaria on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on June 15, 2011. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its June 29, 2001 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.



A statement by the Executive Director for Bulgaria.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BULGARIA
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2011 Consultation with Bulgaria
Approved by Anne-Marie Gulde-Wolf and Aasim Husain
June 15, 2011
Key Issues
Context: The economy has adjusted rapidly following the 2008–10 crisis with an exportled recovery. Fiscal consolidation is being front-loaded, and the banking system remains
well capitalized and stable. Still domestic demand remains weak amid high unemployment
and rising food and fuel prices, and the economy is vulnerable to risks from turbulence in
the euro area periphery. Presidential and municipal elections are scheduled for
October 2011.
Challenges: The challenge going forward will be to address potential risks from an
uncertain external environment while also accelerating on-going reforms to regain growth
potential, create jobs, and address aging-related pressures. This would enhance economic
resilience and reinforce the currency board arrangement as the bridge to eventual euro
adoption.
Authorities’ response: The authorities agreed with the need to reignite structural reform,
seeing the National Reform Program (NRP) as meeting that need and point to the
substantial progress in utilizing EU funds to finance reform priorities. They underscored
their commitment to fiscal discipline evidenced by the ambitious adjustment underway to
permit a quick exit from the excessive deficit procedure and new Financial Stability Pact
that imposes constitutional limits on the deficit and spending. While acknowledging
remaining vulnerabilities and risks, they believe Bulgaria’s fiscal and financial buffers, and
its strong contingency planning framework, leave it well placed to counter them.
Previous IMF advice: Bulgaria and the IMF maintain excellent relations and policy
implementation has been consistent with Executive Board recommendations. During the
crisis, the authorities drew on previously built buffers, a position supported by IMF advice.
A major pension reform was approved in 2010 to tackle financial pressures in the pension
system, a key concern of recent consultations. The 2008 FSAP Update recommendations
on purchase and assumption frameworks are awaiting greater clarity about the new EU
bank resolution framework.
Mission team: Ms. Purfield (Head), Ms. Mitra, Messrs. Lybek and Pouvelle, (all EUR),
Andritzky (FAD), Grigorian and Hesse, (both MCM), and Vesperoni (SPR). Staff met with
Finance Minister Djankov, Central Bank Governor Iskrov, EU Funds Minister Donchev,
Labor Minister Mladenov, other senior officials, and representatives of the private sector.
It also met with labor unions and employers’ associations to prepare for the Fall IMFITUC-ILO Job Creation Forum. Mr. Manchev (OED) also participated.

2
Contents

Page

I. Macroeconomic Setting: Sizeable and Rapid Adjustment .................................................. 4
II. Outlook: Recovery Faces Headwinds and Risks Remain Elevated .................................... 8
III. Policy Challenges: Managing Risks While Reinvigorating Growth ................................... 9
A. Structural Reforms: Reigniting the Reform Momentum .............................................. 9
B. Fiscal Policy: Growth-Enhancing Adjustment ............................................................ 13
C. Financial Sector: Maintaining Resilience.................................................................... 18
D. Rebuilding Reserves and Fiscal Financing ................................................................. 20
IV. Staff Appraisal ................................................................................................................... 21
Boxes
1. Exports: Developments and Prospects ....................................................................................... 7
2. The Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) ...................................................................... 12
3. EU Funds Absorption: Maximizing the Potential ............................................................. 13
4. Public Pension Reform ...................................................................................................... 16
5. Options for a Fiscal Rule to Complement the Financial Stability Pact ............................. 17
Figures
1. Real Sector Developments ................................................................................................ 23
2. External Sector Developments .......................................................................................... 24
3. Inflation and Monetary Developments .............................................................................. 25
4. Labor Market Developments ............................................................................................. 26
5. Fiscal Developments ......................................................................................................... 27
6. Overview of Financial Stability Indicators in Emerging Europe, 2008–10 ...................... 28
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 2008–12.......................................................... 29
2. Macroeconomic Framework, 2008–16 .............................................................................. 30
3. Real GDP Components, 2008–16...................................................................................... 31
4. Balance of Payments, 2008–16 ......................................................................................... 32
5a. General Government Operations, 2008–16 (In millions of leva) ...................................... 33
5b. General Government Operations, 2008–16 (In percent of GDP) ...................................... 34
6. Monetary Accounts, 2008–12 ........................................................................................... 35
7. Financial Soundness Indicators, 2008–11 ......................................................................... 36
8. External Financial Assets and Liabilities, 2008–16 .......................................................... 37
Appendices
I. External Debt Sustainability Analysis ............................................................................... 38
II. Draft Public Information Notice ........................................................................................ 43

3
Figures
I.1. External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests........................................................................ 39
I.2 Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests ........................................................................... 40
Tables
I.1. External Debit Sustainability Framework, 2006–16 ......................................................... 41
I.2 Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006–16 .................................................. 42

4

I. MACROECONOMIC SETTING: SIZEABLE AND RAPID ADJUSTMENT
1.
The economy is gradually recovering on the back of strong export growth
(Figure 1). After contracting 5.5 percent in 2009, economic growth stabilized in 2010 with
0.2 percent real GDP growth. Amid revived global demand, high international commodities
prices, and gains in market share, exports have rebounded above their pre-crisis peaks
(Box 1). The recovery proceeded in Q1 2011, with real GDP growth expanding by 1½ percent.
Exports remained the sole driver of growth. Consumption and investment continued to contract
reflecting weak investor and consumer confidence in the wake of high unemployment, rising
inflation and precautionary savings amid heightened regional uncertainty.
2.
The current account has adjusted fully unwinding past imbalances (Figure 2). High
export growth coupled with depressed imports resulted in the current account deficit retreating
from 23 to 1 percent of GDP between 2008 and 2010. On a 12-month rolling basis, it registered
a surplus of 1.6 percent of GDP by Q1 2011. Since end-2008, Bulgaria has experienced large
capital outflows as banks and the private sector deleveraged reducing total external
indebtedness to 93½ percent of GDP by end-March. These outflows were more than offset by
FDI inflows, which despite the decline of non-tradable related flows, remained positive
throughout the downturn and supported export performance.
Share of Manufacutring exports, 2000 prices
(percent)

65

2010

Bulgaria: Manufacturing Exports and FDI

90.0

2008

2007

60
2005
2003
50

2004

40
1000
Source: BNB.

70.0
60.0

2006

50.0
40.0

2002

30.0

2001
45

Bulgaria: FDI
(Share of total)

80.0

2009
55

100.0

bubble size represents
manufacturing exports at
2000 prices

2000

20.0

Tradables

10.0

Non-tradables

0.0

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Stock of manufacturing FDI 2000-10 (million Euro)

3.
Bulgarian financial and asset markets have remained stable. While the recovery in
stock market capitalization has lagged that of other emerging European markets, CDS spreads
have halved relative to mid-2010 despite the tensions in euro area financial markets. Bulgaria
has also benefited from upgrades to its sovereign rating outlook. Increasing deposits and a
shrinking Leva-euro interest rate differential point to continued strong confidence in the currency
board arrangement (CBA). Residential real estate prices, are 35 percent below their Q3 2008
peak, but are now showing signs of stabilization in larger urban areas.

5

4.
Inflation has risen with food and energy prices, but core inflation remains
subdued. In contrast to some Eastern
145
European countries, Bulgaria did not
HICP, energy and food price indices (2005=100)
experience core deflation during the crisis.
140
More recently, HICP inflation accelerated
Increase in excise duties on cigarettes
in the latter part of 2010 reflecting increases 135
in global commodity prices (Figure 3). Core 130
Sharp energy and food price
hike
inflation, also begun to pick-up from low
125
levels. However, pressures are easing.
120
Headline HICP inflation eased to
HICP
Energy and unprocessed food
3.3 percent y/y in April 2011, as the effect
115
of last year’s excise increase unwound.
2008M1 2008M7 2009M1 2009M7 2010M1 2010M7 2011M1
Source: Eurostat.

5.
Unemployment doubled over the course of the downturn and remains high
(Figure 4). Registered unemployment peaked at 10.3 percent in 2010, although labor force data
suggest it continued to rise to about 12 percent in Q1 2011. The increase was sharpest amongst
the young, where Bulgaria experienced one of the largest increases outside the Baltics. Job
destruction was most severe in manufacturing, services and construction. Sharp employment
reduction contributed to a 6.4 percent increase in output per worker in 2010.
6.
Prompt and sizeable fiscal adjustment helped contain the budgetary impact of the
downturn. The crisis triggered a sharp decline in government revenues (Figure 5). While
Bulgaria was able draw on its fiscal buffer (accumulated from past fiscal surpluses) to cushion
the shock, after years of rapid growth, expenditures needed to adjust to lower revenue levels.
In 2010, expenditure-led adjustment—including substantial reductions in public sector
employment and capital outlays, and a wage and pension bill freeze—contained the 2010
deficit (ESA95 basis) to 3.2 percent of GDP (target of 3.8 percent of GDP). Arrears

6
accumulated by end-2009 (1 percent of GDP) were almost halved. A pension reform that raised
the contribution rate, increased service period and the retirement age was also passed with the
social partners’ support. The deficit was largely financed by drawdown of the fiscal reserve,
which by end-2010 was almost half its pre-crisis level, and public debt remained low at
16.2 percent of GDP.
7.
Prudent regulatory policies allowed the banking system to weather the crisis well
(Figure 6). On average profits remain positive and all banks have a capital adequacy
ratio (CAR) of over 12 percent (system average 17.7 percent at end-March). As in other
countries, nonperforming loans (NPLs) have risen, reaching 12.9 percent by end-March 2011.
Having entered the crisis with conservative regulatory standards and high capital levels, the
BNB reduced risk weights on bank capital for retail exposures and mortgages to the EU
minimum which helped boost the CAR in 2010. It also relaxed its loan classification and
provisioning requirement rules to reduce pressure on banks and encouraged banks to retain
profits. Nevertheless, the ratio of provisions to loans of about 70 percent remains high by
regional standards. With credit demand subdued—credit grew by a modest 1.3 percent
in 2010—and retail deposits growing robustly (Figure 3), foreign-owned banks have reduced
their reliance on parent funding. The system-wide loan-to-deposit ratio has fallen to
113 percent and the ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities stands at 30.6 percent.
15
190

Commercial Bank Foreign Liabilities
(Index, Jan. 2008=100)

14

170

470

Foreign Banks’ Exposures to Emerging
Europe’s and Bulgarian banks
(Billion of US Dollar )

13
150
130
110
90
Jan-08 Jul-08 Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11
Sources: BNB; BIS; IMF staff estimates.

450

Bulgaria

430

Emerging Europe excluding
Bulgaria (rhs)

410

12
390
11

370

10

350
2008Q3

2009Q1

2009Q3

2010Q1

2010Q3

8.
The non-bank financial sector—comprising insurance companies, pension funds,
collective investment schemes, and leasing companies—continues to develop. Insurance
companies and pension funds’ assets rose in 2010, but at 9.7 percent of GDP, they are
one-tenth of banking sector assets. Even though the non-life insurance sector was severely hit
by the financial crisis and registered losses in 2010, its solvency ratio remains high
(187 percent at end-2010).

7

Box 1. Exports: Developments and Prospects
Exports buoyancy during the last decade suggests that tradables can contribute significantly to
economic growth in coming years.
Export growth has been high during the last decade, and manufacturing exports the most
dynamic. Exports volumes increased by
12 percent on average in 2000–08, and by
9 percent last year. While commodity
exports were in part boosted by high
prices, the increase in manufacturing
exports was associated with volumes,
which increased by more than 15 percent
during 2000–08. The recent recovery was
also led by manufacturing.
Within manufacturing exports,
investment goods were the most
buoyant. Second to exports of clothing
and footwear in the early 2000s,
investment goods (such as machinery and
equipment) took the lead in
manufacturing by the mid-2000s. The
strong recovery of these exports
since 2009 suggests that the sector has built the capacity to continue its expansion in coming
years.
Bulgaria’s main market is the European Union (EU). It demands more than 60 percent of
exports (about 65 percent of investment
goods, 75 percent of consumption goods,
and 60 percent of commodities). Other
European countries hold a 25 percent share
in exports, mainly in commodities and
energy. Exports to Asia—although low at
9 percent of the total—are increasing,
especially investment goods. At the country
level, Germany holds the highest share
(11 percent of exports), followed by Italy
(10 percent), and Romania and Turkey
(9 percent each).
Bulgaria experienced a large increase in
market share during the last 10 years. Its
share in world imports almost doubled, in
line with the highest performers within
Central and Eastern Europe. Moreover, due to exports’ strong recovery in 2010, Bulgaria’s recent
increase in market share was among the highest in the region.
FDI will be important for continued exports buoyancy. The experience during the last 10
years suggests that the gradual increase in manufacturing FDI stock have been instrumental in
boosting export volumes. Hence, sustained strong FDI to manufacturing will be key to fostering
exports and higher economic growth.

8
II. OUTLOOK: RECOVERY FACES HEADWINDS AND RISKS REMAIN ELEVATED
9.
The near-term outlook is for modest growth as headwinds from high
unemployment and uncertainty weigh on domestic demand (Table 1). Export growth is
20
expected to remain strong and allow
Bulgaria: GDP components contribution
real GDP to grow by 3 percent
(Percent)
15
in 2011. Reflecting spillovers to
domestic demand from exports and
10
increased EU funds absorption,
5
investment, and then consumption, is
expected to strengthen later this year
0
and next helping raise GDP growth
to 3½ percent in 2012. Import
-5
demand would remain subdued and
Domestic Demand
the current account deficit is
-10
Exports
Imports
expected to move closer to balance.
-15
With FDI inflows gradually
2003-08
2009-10
2011-12
2013-16
Source: WEO; IMF staff estimates.
increasing and the non-bank private
sector reducing its debt burden, external indebtedness should decline further. Higher food and
fuel prices are projected to bring average HIPC inflation to 4¼ percent in 2011, before falling
back to about 3 percent in 2012. Given the moderate speed of recovery, a quick reduction in
unemployment is unlikely.
10.
Medium-term growth is expected to be broader-based but more moderate than
before the crisis (Tables 2, 3). Growth is rebalancing between the domestic and external
sectors, building on gains in export market share and improved competitiveness. Real GDP
growth is expected to converge to an average rate of about 4 percent over the medium term,
allowing real GDP to regain its 2008 peak in 2012 and the output gap to close by 2016. Still
by 2016, per capita income levels would only be 40 percent GDP of the euro area average and
over the longer-run, structural bottlenecks and population aging could constrain growth
potential.
11.
External vulnerabilities remain high. Despite the current account correction, the
increase in gross international reserves since end-2008, and the large portion of intercompany
debt in the external debt burden, vulnerabilities remain (Appendix I). Bulgaria’s external debt
is still significant, and generates a relatively high total financing need of about 25½ percent of
GDP for 2011 (Appendix Table I.1). About 23½ percent of GDP reflects the rollover of private
sector debt, including parent bank support of just over 3 percent of GDP. Moreover,
international reserves in excess of the minimum coverage required under the currency board,

9
have fallen from 28 percent of total deposits at end-2008 to 22 percent in April 2011, reflecting
in part the drawdown of the fiscal reserve to finance the deficit.1
12.
Risks are tilted to the downside. Given the significant presence of foreign-owned
banks in Bulgaria, financial spillovers from tensions in the euro area periphery could negatively
impact the financial system, including by causing parents of euro area periphery banks to
accelerate deleveraging and eroding confidence. In such circumstances, the anticipated
recovery in domestic demand would likely stall and exports would be negatively impacted
(exports to the euro area periphery comprise just under 10 percent of total exports), especially if
growth in Western Europe were also to falter. In this context, Bulgaria’s international and fiscal
reserves constitute critical buffers to help counter such a shock. Barring adverse shocks, growth
has however the potential to be higher than currently forecast, if exports surprise, confidence
improves to allow consumption to revive strongly, or if EU funds absorption exceeds
expectations. Such a strengthening in demand, if accompanied by a return of large scale capital
inflows, could test the current account correction.
Authorities’ Views
13.
The authorities broadly agreed with the assessment but saw greater upside
potential. They saw domestic demand recovering more quickly in 2011 given steps to improve
EU funds absorption and strength of exports. On-going structural reforms are expected to lift
potential growth in the medium-term. With respect to the regional risks, European-IMF
financial assistance to the euro area periphery was seen as the first line of defense to contain
external risks, although reserves were seen to be adequate to counter shocks.
III. POLICY CHALLENGES: MANAGING RISKS WHILE REINVIGORATING GROWTH
Having demonstrated its ability to adjust rapidly, the challenge is to bolster longer-term
growth prospects while also sustaining Bulgaria’s resilience to shocks. Doing so would
reinforce the already strong CBA as the bridge to eventual euro adoption. Increasing fiscal,
and maintaining financial sector, buffers will be essential to enhancing capacity to counter
potential shocks, including from the euro area periphery. Policies to accelerate on-going
structural reforms, make spending more supportive of growth and sustainable over the longerrun, and safeguard financial system soundness would strengthen economic fundamentals and
aid smoother convergence.
A. Structural Reforms: Reigniting the Reform Momentum
14.
Bulgaria’s competitiveness is improving. Despite some appreciation over recent
years, the CGER-valuation range, and export performance suggests the real exchange rate is
1

Ninety percent of the fiscal reserve is deposited at the central bank, and recorded as international reserves.

10
broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 2). Wage growth had moderated in the face of rising
unemployment, and is now broadly in-line with productivity growth (Figure 4). Moreover,
National Account based wage data suggests the gap with productivity growth over the period of
accession has been less than that
suggested by less reliable high frequency
210
Real Exchange Rate
survey data.
(ULC, index number, 1999=100)
190
Bulgaria
15.
Stepping up convergence and
Slovakia
170
Estonia
job creation will require accelerating
Latvia
Lithuania
on-going structural reforms to boost
150
Romania
competitiveness and growth. The Global
130
Competitiveness Report and the World
Bank Doing Business Indicators point to
110
infrastructure, education, technology
90
adaption, burdensome administrative
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Source: Eurostat.
procedures, and judicial inefficiencies as
major challenges. Recent scores on the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators and
Corruption Perception Indices also suggest that governance and corruption remain a challenge.
The new National Reform Program (NRP) appropriately identifies reforms aimed at amplifying
competitiveness by increasing the returns to investment in export-oriented industries.

World Bank Doing Business 2011

Global Competitiveness Index 2010-11
More competitive

More competitive
Starting business

Institutions

0

Closing a Business

Innovation &
Sophistication

Construction Permit

50
100

Enforcing Contracts

0

Technological
Readiness

Paying Taxes

Getting Credit

Protecting Investors

Financial Market
Development
EU
Bulgaria

Macro
Environment

2

Registering Property

Trading Across Borders

Infrastructure

6
4

Market Size

150

8

Labor Market
Efficiency

Health& Primary
Education

Higher Education
Goods Market
Efficiency

EU
BGR

Source: World Economic Forum; World Bank.

16.
Increased labor productivity and better skills matching will help lift growth
prospects. The NRP rightly identifies the greatest potential for productivity gains in young low
skilled unemployed where a skills mismatch is preventing their hiring into vacancies. Job
placement services and targeted vocational training programs are being scaled-up using EU
social funds to tackle unemployment in the near-term. Long-term youth unemployment will
also need to be addressed through active coordination of tertiary and vocational education with
employers’ needs (especially in tradeables sectors) and apprenticeships. Social security

11
contributions also need to be made compatible with more flexible working arrangements to
encourage participation.
17.
Efforts to reduce the administrative burden can be replicated across all levels of
government. Bulgaria is set to achieve its 2012 goal of reducing the administrative burden on
firms by 20 percent, based on reforms at the central government level. However, municipal
registration, licensing, and permit requirements remain burdensome. A universal internet-based
system could reduce compliance costs, increase transparency and help reduce corruption.
Contract enforcement at all levels could benefit from simplification of the rules, training of
municipal authorities, and judicial reform.
18.
Reducing bottlenecks to EU funds absorption will be critical to improve the
coverage and quality of infrastructure (Box 3). With World Bank, EBRD and EIB
assistance, project preparation capacity is strengthening. Within the last year, controls have
been streamlined, verification controls and audit strengthened, while coordination barriers
across government agencies are being tackled. Proposed amendments to the Public
Procurement Act will streamline the tendering process for EU-funded projects. These reforms
should help unleash EU funding for infrastructure and improve its predictability. The proposed
restructuring of the railway sector, supported by the World Bank, can modernize Bulgaria’s
outdated rail network and enhance regional connectivity to facilitate trade.
Authorities’ Views
19.
Reducing unemployment by improving labor force quality and increasing EU
funds absorption are the main priorities. So far, the administrative reforms implemented
have contributed to a substantial increase in EU funds absorption, lending confidence in the
ability to meet the targeted doubling of the absorption rate in 2011. By making more effective
use of EU social funds, training and employment opportunities for more than 100,000 workers
have been created. The amendments to the labor code in Parliament envisage greater flexibility
for temporary and distance work. Moreover, they are confident the comprehensive reforms in
the NRP combined with Bulgaria’s competitive wage levels, will lead to more robust and
sustainable medium-term growth and ultimately faster income convergence.

12

Box 2. The Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER)
The external adjustment continued in 2010, reducing the current account deficit below its
projected medium term underlying value. The sudden stop in capital inflows—which peaked
at 42 percent of GDP in 2007—has largely corrected the absorption gap through a sharp decline
in domestic demand that took the current account deficit close to balance in 2010. A gradual
recovery in economic activity in coming years would widen the current account deficit
somewhat (Table 4).
Overall, CGER-type estimates suggest
that the REER is broadly in line with
fundamentals, which seems consistent
with the rapid recovery in exports. While
the REER has appreciated over the last
years, the CGER-valuation range suggests
that it is not misaligned. Bulgaria’s exports
market shares in the EU—which more than
doubled since 2000—also suggests that
competitiveness has not hampered the
export recovery that began in 2009.

Exchange Rate Assessment - Macrobalance Approach
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Indicators

Current account norm
Underlying current account

-3.4
-3.3

Gap

-0.1

REER required adjustment (in percent)

0.3

Memorandum
Current account elasticity to REER

-0.3

The macroeconomic balance approach
suggests that the REER is slightly undervalued. The underlying saving investment balance—
estimated as the current account balance net of EU capital transfers at the end of the projection
period—is compared against the current account norm calculated through CGER-type
methodologies. This suggests that the real exchange rate is undervalued by about ¼ percent.
The external sustainability approach points to a somewhat larger REER undervaluation.
This approach—which assesses the adjustment needed to stabilize the international investment
position (Table 8) at its medium term value, a negative 70.9 percent of GDP under current
projections—suggests that the REER is undervalued by 3.4 percent.
The equilibrium real exchange rate methodology points to a small overvaluation. This
Exchange Rate Assessment - External Sustainability
method compares the estimation of the
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
equilibrium REER based on the average
value of fundamentals during the last 10
IIP target (in
percent of GDP)
years against the estimation based on the
-70.9
current value of fundamentals, and finds
that the real exchange rate is overvalued
Current account norm
-4.4
by 3.9 percent.
Underlying current account
-3.3
Gap

-1.1

REER required adjustment (in percent)

3.4

Memorandum items
GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator (in percent)

4.0
2.5

13
Box 3: EU Funds Absorption: Maximizing the Potential
EU funds allocated to Bulgaria for the period 2007–13 amount to €9.4 billion, or about
26 percent of 2010 GDP, excluding about €2 billion in national co-financing
Disbursements only reached 10 percent of the total by end-2010. The absorption rate was very
low compared to Latvia and Lithuania—the highest ranked in the EU in terms of absorption—
where some 30.0 and 29.0 percent had been disbursed between 2007–10.
The government aims to increase absorption to €770 million in 2011, which is equal to the
total absorption for 2007–10. Effective absorption has the potential to provide a substantial
boost to the economy. Estimates suggest the efficient use of the social and cohesion funds could
boost potential GDP growth by 0.30 -1.43 percent per year in 2007–13, rising to about 3 percent
in 2017–25.
The low rate of absorption in Bulgaria reflects various weaknesses. Compliance reports and
control systems did not initially observe EC requirements. Cumbersome application and
procurement procedures impeded project implementation. Beneficiaries lack capacity for timely
preparation of the projects and face long payment lags. There are also problems with tender
procedures, expropriation procedures for land as well as environmental estimates, and financial
irregularities.
In the second half of 2010, absorption accelerated. This reflected the high priority assigned by
the government, various administrative reforms, as well as the appointment of a special EU Funds
Minister to improve coordination. To build on this progress, the proposed Public Procurement
Law could be complemented by reforms that establish partnerships with private parties involved
in the process, address weaknesses in the application and implementation process especially at the
municipal level, speed-up ex-ante controls in bidding documentation, and shorten the preparation
phase of large infrastructure and environment projects.

B. Fiscal Policy: Growth-Enhancing Adjustment
20.
Fiscal policy in 2011 is focused on securing a rapid exit from the EU excessive
deficit procedure (EDP) and ensuring low public debt (Appendix I). The 2011 budget
deficit targets a continued reduction in the deficit to 2.5 percent of GDP (ESA 95 terms). This
target will help preserve the fiscal reserve, provide a margin with respect to the Maastricht
deficit ceiling, and will also counter inflationary pressures. Although budget execution was in
line with the first quarter plan, profit taxes and social security contributions exhibited some
shortfalls. To ensure a timely exit, it will be important to sustain ongoing efforts to counter tax
and social security evasion and resist pressures for generalized wage and pension hikes.
Targeted increases in minimum social benefit payments would more effectively protect
vulnerable groups from inflation pressure and could be financed through the budget
contingency. Should expenditure cuts prove necessary during the year, every effort should be
made to protect growth enhancing capital outlays while controlling new commitments. In the
event revenue over-performs, the additional funds should be saved to boost the fiscal reserve.
21.
Fiscal consolidation is being anchored on Bulgaria’s medium-term objective of
securing a small budget deficit (Tables 5a, b). The revised medium-term fiscal objective of a
0.6 percent deficit (previously a 0.5 percent surplus) is still consistent with a continued decline

14
in debt. The Convergence Program (CP) anticipates reducing the fiscal deficit to achieve this
target by 2014. This entails a total adjustment of about 2 percent of GDP between 2012
and 2014, although under more conservative assumptions regarding revenue buoyancy, the
adjustment could be about ½ percent higher. The pace of adjustment serves to safeguard the
fiscal reserve without placing an undue drag on the recovery but aiming for some safety margin
with respect to the consolidation target would address the risks of shortfalls. Depending on the
pace of recovery after 2014, fiscal policy should pursue a more ambitious objective of a small
surplus to provide a greater cyclical cushion relative to the Maastricht deficit ceiling.
22.
The consolidation hinges on continued expenditure restraint. Against the backdrop
of stable tax system, the CP envisages a continued real contraction of spending to the lower
levels of post-boom revenue. The contraction is largely achieved through the imposition of
tight spending ceilings, including the extension of the wage and pension bill freezes through
end-2012. In this context, the new ceilings on government liabilities will be crucial to ensure
control of spending commitments.
23.
Measures to further increase spending efficiency would improve the quality and
durability of the consolidation effort. Going forward, strong spending control should be
accompanied by reforms that create space within the tighter budget envelope to improve
spending effectiveness, enhance service quality, and free resources for growth-enhancing
education, and capital outlays. The priorities include:


Health care: Recent reforms in drug procurement should contribute to improved cost
control, enhanced access, and reasonable pricing of pharmaceuticals. Responsibilities
between the Ministry of Health and the National Health Insurance Fund are being
streamlined. These reforms should be complemented by steps to rationalize the hospital
sector (reducing overcapacity) and improve information systems so reforms translate
into better healthcare access and outcomes.



Public administration: To reduce its overly large public sector, the central government
shed 12 percent of its workforce by closing obsolete agencies and reforming customs
and security forces since mid-2009. With more cuts expected in 2011, space has been
created for the introduction of performance-based remuneration to attract more skilled
staff without increasing the overall payroll envelope. The achievements at the central
government level need to be expanded to autonomous spending units, particularly
municipalities.



Pensions: The 2010 pension reform yielded 0.6 percent of GDP in savings per year, but
an annual deficit of about 4 percent of GDP remains and the contribution-benefit gap
will widen further as the population ages and a higher pension accrual rate kicks in
after 2016 (Box 4). Therefore, further efforts are needed to make a dent in the sizeable
deficit projected post-2016, including further increases in the retirement age and service

15
period, linking them to life expectancy, and by anchoring benefit increases to
developments in pension contributions.
24.
To enhance fiscal policy credibility, the authorities plan to adopt a constitutional
deficit ceiling as part of a “Financial Stability Pact.” The proposed Pact contains a
constitutional deficit ceiling that—at two percent—is set tighter than the Stability and Growth
Pact. The Pact also limits expenditures to 40 percent of GDP, and subjects changes in direct
taxes to a constitutional majority vote. The pact provides strong backing to Bulgaria’s
commitment under the Euro Pact Plus. However, the high bar to change direct taxes risks
limiting flexibility on the revenue-side to indirect tax rates.
25.
A simple and well-designed fiscal rule would reinforce the Pact and provide
greater guidance to fiscal policy over the economic cycle. The recent crisis underscored the
importance of restraining expenditure during upswings. As the constitutional cap on the
spending-to-GDP ratio is unlikely to provide a sufficient guide to policy, the pact should be
complemented by a fiscal rule. To this end, a transparent rule linking fiscal policy to a prudent
estimate of potential growth, incorporating mechanisms to correct deviations, and creating
savings in upswings should be included in the organic budget law (Box 5). The effectiveness of
the Pact and new rule would be enhanced by an independent institution that reviews the budget
and evaluates reforms.
Authorities’ Views
26.
The authorities maintain strict control over spending and are confident that
reforms would improve spending quality. They underscored the importance of a timely EDP
exit to cement their standing within the EU as a country with conservative fiscal policies. The
authorities were standing firm against spending pressures and would only re-evaluate space for
targeted increases if revenue surprised positively. They were confident that the Pact would
receive broad-based support. The constitutional bar for changes in direct tax rates was seen as
providing assurance about the stability of the tax regime while sufficient flexibility is retained
as indirect taxes would not be subject to the super majority requirement. The authorities plan to
formulate a proposal for a fiscal rule by the fall. However, with limited institutional capacity
domestically and already strong oversight under the EU semester, the authorities saw little
scope for a fiscal council. While acknowledging the need for safeguarding the long-term
financial viability of the pension system, they wanted to first evaluate the effects of the recent
reforms.

16

Box 4: Public Pension Reform
In face of high and rising spending pressures from Bulgaria’s public pension system, the
government implemented a pension reform package in fall 2010. At 10 percent of GDP,
Bulgaria’s pension outlays are high by regional standards. The crisis revealed weaknesses in the social
security system with sharply declining contribution collections and a jump in benefit claims. Despite
the recovery, the deficit in the public pension system is expected to increase over time given
population aging and generous pension entitlements, including early retirement rules and partial wage
indexation.
In November 2010, the authorities agreed on a reform package. With IMF technical assistance,
the authorities identified possible measures for a pension reform and initiated first steps. The reform
package increased the contribution rate by 1.8 percentage points from 2011 and the service
requirement for a full pension by four months each year from 2012 until 2020. It also increases the
retirement age gradually to 65 years for men and 63 years for women over the next two decades.

While commendable, more needs to be done to ensure sustainability. In the short run, more
ambitious increases in the contribution rate and service requirement should be coupled with tightened
controls on disability pension beneficiaries to reduce their abuse. This could reduce the pension deficit
by about 1 percent of GDP. In the medium term, an additional 4 percent of GDP could be saved by
(i) gradually increasing the retirement age to 66 years and linking it to life expectancy; (ii) a change to
a less generous indexation of benefits; (iii) raising second pillar contribution rates; and
(iv) harmonizing pension treatment across most professions, including the phase-out of overly
generous early retirement pensions. Complementary reforms to remove investment restrictions and
develop an annuities market could boost returns on pension savings accumulated under the second and
third pillars.

17
Box 5: Options for a Fiscal Rule to Complement the Financial Stability Pact
A fiscal rule could help guide fiscal policy particularly during upswings. As the economy
recovers and with the overall deficit and debt low levels, the proposed ceilings in Pact are unlikely
to present a binding constraint to guide policy going forward. A supplementary fiscal rule would
complement the Pact.
Suitable designs include a growth-adjusted balance rule or an expenditure rule. On one hand,
the former presents the most comprehensive framework and prescribes realistic adjustment paths.
On the other hand, the expenditure rule gives clear guidance in the budget planning process and is
ideally suited to prevent procyclical expansions.
Growth-adjusted balance rule
 Strong guidance throughout the cycle

Advantages

 Smooth adjustment path towards
balance target

Expenditure rule
 Clear guidance for expenditure
budgeting
 Prevents procyclical expansion
 Good track record in other countries

Disadvantages

 Limited countercyclicality

 No guidance on revenue policies

 Fairly complicated formula

 Difficult calibration

Using historical outturns for 2002–10, the growth-adjusted balance rule would have allowed a
strong countercyclical fiscal response at the height of the crisis. The expenditure rule would have
resulted in the accumulation of higher buffers by preventing the fiscal expansion in the boom years,
allowing for a slower pace of consolidation path after the shock hit. Looking forward, each rule
would result in low debt and deficits.
Cyclical Stance of Fiscal Rules: CAB and Output Gap 2002-10
Change in Cyclically Adjusted Balance

Procyclical

(Change in percentage points)

Countercyclical

4

2003

1

2005

0.5

2008
2004

0

2002

0
-8

-6
2009

-4

-2

0

2

4

-0.5

Growth-adjusted
balance rule

-1

-1
-2
-3

Countercyclical

-4

Expenditure rule

-1.5

2007

Procyclical

Change in Output Gap

1

(Change in percent of GDP)

1.5

2006

2
2010

Response of the Overall Balance

1

3

Actual
Growth-adjusted balance rule
Expenditure rule

2

/ The shock refers to a two standard deviation shock in the output gap.

-2
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

18
C. Financial Sector: Maintaining Resilience
27.
The banking system, while stable and well capitalized (Tables 6, 7), continues to
operate in a challenging environment. The challenges are two-fold. Asset quality remains a
120
key concern particularly given the
Assets and deposits of groups of banks in Bulgaria, at
end-2010 (percent of GDP)
increase in NPLs against the backdrop
100
Domestic
of a hesitant recovery in domestic
Other foreign
Austrian
demand that is keeping credit demand,
80
Euro Area periphery
and hence profits that aid potential loss
60
absorption, low. However, in the
context of heightened regional
40
uncertainty, financial spillovers and a
20
reversal in parent bank funding are also
a risk. In particular euro area periphery
0
Assets
Deposits
banks, which hold 28½ percent of
Source: BNB; IMF staff estimates.
banking system assets and 25¼ percent
of non-financial corporate and household deposits, are particularly vulnerable to spillovers
from tensions in their home country or parent-banks.
28.
The deterioration in asset quality is one of the main challenges facing the banking
system but existing buffers appear adequate. BNB’s estimates suggest NPLs are expected to
peak in the later part of 2011 and then gradually decline. The existing levels of provisions,
collateral and expected recovery in profits, should allow the banking system to comfortably
absorb such losses while maintaining high levels of capital adequacy. Still, a more protracted
recovery could delay this decline, while high unemployment and a weak property market pose
challenges to the quality of risk exposures to construction, real estate, and small and mediumsized firms.
29.
Improvements in the household and corporate insolvency framework would
strengthen credit growth. So far, weak credit growth largely reflects a lack of demand, as the
private sector has paid down debt and has been reluctant to engage in new borrowing despite
the reduction in lending rates. As the recovery gathers pace, it will be important that NPLs not
constrain the ability of banks to resume lending. High legal fees, uncertainty about the
legal process and questionable outcomes from loan recovery are slowing asset workout and risk
constraining new lending. Clear criteria for the initiation of insolvency proceedings, expedited
court approval of pre-packaged restructuring plans, and priority status to creditors who inject
new capital to the rehabilitation process would improve the debt restructuring process.
30.
As the economy recovers, regulatory requirements should remain tight to rebuild
buffers in the banking system. Provisioning requirements and certain risk weights were
appropriately eased during the crisis to allow banks to utilize some of their buffers to absorb
losses. With the recovery still not firmly established and real estate prices yet to fully stabilize,
restructured loans should be closely monitored to ensure appropriate provisioning and collateral

19
valuation. As the recovery strengthens, the regulatory easing implemented in the crisis could be
gradually reversed. The still conservative Bulgarian regulatory and supervisory regime will
facilitate the implementation of the new Basel III requirements.
31.
Challenges posed by weaker banks are being firmly addressed. Weaker banks
continue to be closely monitored via more frequent data reporting and supervisory visits. The
supervisory colleges under the European Financial Stability Framework, has significantly
improved co-operation and information flows. A sale of a Slovenian-owned bank was just
completed, and a takeover of a mainly Irish-owned bank is in the pipeline. The recent crisis did
not result in any liquidations or recourse to the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF). However the
legal framework for bank resolution should be comprehensively reviewed to determine whether
the BNB would have sufficient tools to address any potential bank resolutions.
32.
The loan-to-deposit ratio of the system has improved but remains high for some
banks. Reflecting the strong growth in deposits over the past year, the ratio of liquid-assets to
short-term liabilities has risen.
Nevertheless, many foreign-owned
banks continue to operate with
comparatively high loan-to-deposit
ratios. As demonstrated in 2009, the
on-going support pledged by parents
is crucial to address potential liquidity
and capital needs. While all banks
currently exhibit a CAR above
12 percent, the BNB continues to
receive assurances from all parents
that they would provide the capital
and liquidity required to ensure banks
are well-equipped to address potential needs. Moreover, in addition to reserve requirements,
banks are required to have a 15 percent coverage ratio of deposits from credit institutions,
retail, and corporate customers by liquid assets, which also provide a buffer. Even in the event
parent funding were to become limited, gross international reserves in excess of the minimum
coverage required under the CBA represent 22 percent of banking system deposits, providing a
further backstop.
33.
Contingency planning remains essential given regional uncertainty. The authorities
are actively participating in discussions on the design of a soon-to-be issued European
contingency planning framework and continuously improving their stress testing
methodologies. The BNB and MOF are working together within the existing contingency
planning framework to prepare for the envisaged EU-wide changes.

20
Authorities’ Views
34.
The authorities see the banking system as well-equipped to deal with the
vulnerabilities. The BNB’s stringent stress tests demonstrate the adequacy of existing buffers.
The authorities stressed the importance of avoiding premature tightening when credit demand is
weak, and especially as the regulatory regime remains very conservative by international
standards. They also have an array of tools to deal with sudden liquidity risks. Banks’ required
reserves with the BNB provide an important line of defense. Solvent banks can also
temporarily draw on BNB liquidity subject to haircuts on eligible collateral according to the
BNB Law and Ordinance No. 6. Even though such loans may not exceed the limit fixed by the
CBA, reserves are currently well in excess of this floor and can offer a sizeable backstop to the
banking system. Other back-stop mechanisms can also be used, including tools to take over a
bank and sell it in line with the bank resolution framework. Moreover, their experience from
the 1996/97 banking crisis, and with their crisis preparedness frameworks well tested by the
events of 2008, the authorities are well equipped to act swiftly. Improvements to the bank
resolution and contingency planning framework would be made in the context of on-going
initiatives at the EU level.
D. Rebuilding Reserves and Fiscal Financing
35.
The CBA is the bridge to eventual euro adoption. It has been a pillar of
macroeconomic stability in Bulgaria since inflation stabilization in the late 1990s, offering a
credible anchor to the economy as Bulgaria entered the European Union. Moreover, during the
financial crisis, the economy has shown its ability to adjust rapidly under the policy limits
imposed by the CBA, and confidence in the monetary regime remains high. Consequently, the
CBA is the right instrument to guide policies until eventual euro adoption.
36.
High international reserves support the CBA, and bolster its ability to sustain
potential shocks. The fiscal reserve, comprising one-fifth of total external reserves, played a
critical role in allowing Bulgaria to weather the recent crisis so well, underpinning confidence
in the CBA. High reserve buffers provide Bulgaria extra resources to address shocks and
ensures it is comfortably placed to meet the upcoming bond amortization payments (Eurobond
repayments of about €1 billion in both 2013 and 2015). Recent drawdown of the FRA to
finance the fiscal deficit has reduced reserve coverage to below 180 (at end-April 2011)
from 200 percent of reserve money (at end-January 2010). Given the external risks, the fiscal
reserve should now be preserved and rebuilt.
37.
A Eurobond issue in 2011, complemented by privatization and domestic debt
issuance, would quickly rebuild fiscal reserves. A ‘Eurobond’ issue offers the greatest potential
to quickly increase reserve coverage ratios at a reasonable cost given Bulgaria’s low debt, favorable
spreads and sovereign ratings, and the current low interest rate environment. If market conditions
prevent this, the authorities should consider increasing domestic bond issuance as long as liquidity
conditions are favorable. The renewed push for privatization planned for 2011 would not only

21
enlarge the role of the private sector, but would also yield complementary resources to
replenish the fiscal reserve. To make the government’s debt management strategy more effective,
existing issues should be consolidated, benchmark issues established, and the system of primary
dealership streamlined to enhance market liquidity, as recommended by recent IMF technical
assistance.
Authorities’ Views
38.
The authorities have not included a Eurobond issue in their 2011 fiscal financing
strategy. They concur with the staff about the importance of the financial buffer during the
recent financial crisis, and plan to rebuild the fiscal reserve over time. However, they are
planning steps to tap the Eurobond market in 2012, as they consider their liquidity buffers
adequate for 2011.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
39.
The export-led recovery continues but faces headwinds from rising inflation and
uncertainty. Exports have rebounded above pre-crisis levels. However, consumption remains
weak amid increases in inflation and heightened regional uncertainty. Staff expects moderate
real GDP growth in 2011, with risks tilted to the downside. Looking ahead, real GDP is
expected to recover to its pre-crisis levels by 2012 but reach its potential only in 2016 with
more modest growth than before the crisis.
40.
Nonetheless, in the context of greater uncertainty regarding the euro area
periphery, the economy remains vulnerable to external shocks. The external debt burden is
still significant and it generates a relatively large re-financing need, including for the financial
sector. The linkages of the financial sector to the euro area periphery are a source of risk.
Tensions could spill over into Bulgaria, including by causing euro area periphery banks to
deleverage more quickly, and eroding confidence. This would have the potential to de-rail the
recovery.
41.
Preserving and rebuilding international and fiscal reserves will help bolster
defenses to counter such risks. The fiscal reserve played a critical role through the crisis,
serving both to finance the deficit and underpin confidence in the CBA. While all banks are
well capitalized and the system is liquid, it would be important in light of the risks to further
bolster potential backstops. The fiscal reserve should now be preserved and quickly rebuilt
through more proactive debt issuance and privatization. High reserve buffers provide Bulgaria
extra resources to address shocks and ensures it is comfortably placed to meet the upcoming
bond amortization payments.
42.
Crisis preparedness and contingency planning remain essential given the regional
uncertainty. While the financial system has proven resilient and capital and liquidity appears
ample, in the current environment, continued close monitoring of banks and coordination with
home supervisors and the Ministry of Finance will be needed to contain risks.

22
43.
While banking system indicators have improved over the last two years,
deteriorated asset quality also calls for continued vigilance. Capital indicators remain
strong, but the level of NPLs remains high, and profits have declined amid weak credit demand.
With recovery not yet firmly established, restructured loans should be closely monitored to
ensure appropriate provisioning and collateral valuation. Still current profits, existing
provisions, collateral, and capital appear adequate to absorb potential losses. As the recovery
gathers pace, the regulatory easing implemented in the crisis could be gradually reversed.
Improvements in the corporate and household debt resolution framework would strengthen
credit growth.
44.
Sustained structural reforms are needed to jump-start job creation and income
convergence. The NRP appropriately targets measures aimed at reducing the huge skills
mismatch, especially in tradeables sectors. Welcome progress has been made in improving
product markets and addressing bottlenecks to EU funds absorption. These reforms need to be
replicated at all levels of government, and judicial and governance shortcomings addressed to
enhance Bulgaria’s attractiveness for foreign direct investment.
45.
Exit from the EDP and the proposed Financial Stability Pact underscore
Bulgaria’s commitment to prudent fiscal policies. Every effort should be made to meet
the 2011 deficit target and resist spending pressures. Over the medium-term, a safety margin
with respect to the new medium-term objective would address revenue underperformance risks.
While continued imposition of tight budget ceilings has yielded commendable efficiency gains
in recent years, deeper reforms in health, public administration, and pensions are needed to
improve the quality of public spending and to address pressures related to aging.
Complementing the Financial Pact with a rule linking fiscal policy to a prudent estimate of
potential growth would help restrain expenditure in upswings.
46.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Bulgaria will be held on
the standard 12-month cycle.

23
Figure 1. Bulgaria: Real Sector Developments
Post-crisis GDP remains well below potential, whose growth was
halved during the crisis.
40

The recovery has been export-led...

46

Bulgaria GDP
(Billons of NC)

44
42

20

40

10

38

0

36
34

-10

Real GDP

32

-20

Potential GDP

30

-30

28
26
2000

25
20

GDP components contribution
(in percent)

30

2002

2004

2006

2008

-40
2008Q1

2010

...as in other NMS...

160

Contributions to GDP growth, 2010

150

Imports
Exports
Investment
Consumption
GDP growth (y/y)
2008Q4

2009Q3

2010Q2

...and industrial production and investment are
showing signs of improvement.
BGR Investor Confidence (Percent, SA, rhs)
NMS Investor Confidence (Percent, SA, rhs)
BGR Industrial Production (2005=100, SA)
NMS Industrial Production (2005=100, SA)

20
15
10

15

140

10

130

0

5

120

-5

110

-10

0
-5

-15

-25

-15

100

-10

-20

5

Imports
Investment

Exports
Consumption

-20

90

-25

80

-30

BGR CZE EST HUN LVA LTU POL ROM SVK SVN

160

Consumption, however, remains weak...

140
130
120

100
90

20

-10 18
16
-20
14
-30
12
-40 10

150

110

0

BGR Consumer Confidence (Percent, SA, rhs)
NMS Consumer Confidence (Percent, SA, rhs)
BGR Retail Sales (2005=100, SA)
NMS Retail Sales (2005=100, SA)

...against a backdrop of high unemployment.
BGR Long-term Unemployment (Percent, NSA, RHS)

10

NMS Long-term Unemployment (Percent, NSA, RHS)

9

BGR Unemployment (Percent, SA)

8

NMS Unemployment (Percent, SA)

7
6
5

-50

8

4

-60

6

3

4

2

2

1

0

0

-70
-80

Source: Eurostat, Haver; WEO; IMF Staf f estimates.

24
Figure 2. Bulgaria: External Sector Developments
…raised current account deficits and put pressure
on the RER…

Capital flows before the crisis fueled demand...
100

ROM

80
70

LAT

LIT

60
50

BGR

SLK
POL

40
30
20

EST

SLV

10

HUN

bubble size is
current account
deficit (CAD)

0
-10

0

5

10

15

20

25

RER appr., ULC (percent, 2003-08)

Domestic Demand (growth, 2003-08)

90

-20

…but Bulgaria's current account adjusted swiftly
during the crisis.
Current Account Deficits
(Percent of GDP)

30.0
25.0

Bulgaria

20.0

Baltics

15.0
10.0
5.0

Hungary
Romania

Slovenia

Slovakia

0.0
-5.0

60

2008

2009

40
20

0

HUN
5

10

15

20

25

Capital Inflows (percent of GDP, average 2003-08)
FDI was high compared with CEE countries ...
BGR

100
POL
80

ROM
SLV
HUN

40

LIT

LAT

20
0
0

100.0

High-share

EST
SLK

60

120.0

200

LIT

SLV

0

…aiding exports to increase market share.
Exports
(Share of world imports, 2000=100)

BGR

POL

5
10
15
Capital Inflows (percent of GDP, avg. 2003-08)

2010

250

EST

SLK

-10.0
2007

LAT

120

Share of FDI on Inflows (avg, 2003-08)

35.0

80

-20

Capital Flows (percent of GDP, 2003-08)

bubble size is
current account
deficit
ROM

20

External debt is high, but largely comprising intracompany lending.
External Debt
(Percent of GDP)

80.0
Bulgaria

150

Low-share

60.0
40.0

100

20.0
High-share: Slovakia, Czech, Lithuania, Romania, Poland
Low-share: Latvia, Estonia, Hungary, Croatia, Slovenia

50

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

Source: Bulgaria Authority data; IMF staf f estimates.

0.0
2003

2004

2005

2006

General government
Non-financial Private

2007

2008

2009

2010

Banks
Intra-company lending

25
Figure 3. Bulgaria: Inflation and Monetary Developments
Inflation rose following increases in food and fuel
prices...

16

HICP inflation (y/y, in percent) and contributions
(in pps)

14
12

Food, alcohol, tobacco
Energy
Core
Total

10
8
6

...as in the rest of the region.
20
HICP Inflation (y/y, in percent)
15

BGR
EST
LVA
LIT
ROM
EA

10
5

4
0

2
0
-2
2008M1

2008M9

2009M5

2010M1

-5
2008M1 2008M7 2009M1 2009M7 2010M1 2010M7 2011M1

2010M9

Credit to households fell.

Credit remained flat in 2010.
80

400
Index 2004 = 100
350

BGR
EE average 1/
Euro area

300

Credit growth

70
60

Credit Corporations

50

Credit households

40
250

30
20

200

Credit mortgage
Credit to
economy

10
150

0

100
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

-10
Jan-08 Jul-08 Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11

...despite a fall in lending rates, especially in leva...
16
14
12
10

Household interest rates on new deposits and loans
(in percent)
Consumer loan, leva
Consumer loan, euro
Mortgage, leva

300
Index 2004 = 100

280

BGR

260

EE average 1/

240

Euro area

220

Mortgage, euro

8

...but deposits kept growing.

Deposits, leva Deposits, euro

6

200
180
160

4

140

2

120

0
2009M1

2009M7

2010M1

2010M7

2011M1

Source: BNB; Eurostat; and IMF staf f estimates.
1/ CZE, EST, HUN, LVA, LTA, POL, ROM

100
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

26
Figure 4. Bulgaria: Labor Market Developments
...especially in construction, manuf acturing,
and services...

UE doubled during the downturn...
25

10

Downturn: Contributions to employment
decline (in percent)

Change in Unemployment (in pps) 1/

20

2010 UE
level

15

5
0

Downturn

10

-5

5
-10

0

-15

-5

Construction
Services and Other
Agriculture

-20

-10
Boom

-15

BGR CZE EST HUN LVA LTU POL ROM SVK SVN

-25

BGR CZE EST HUN LVA LTU POL ROMSVK SVN

...severely impacting the youth, and risking f urther
increases in long-term unemployment.

20

Long-term UE,
2010 level

15
Youth

10

Long-term,
change

5

Nominal wage growth (in percent)

25
Downturn Change in Unemployment (in pps) 1/

0

10

Nominal wage growth is slightly higher than
the region, but wage levels remain the
lowest in the EU.

8
4

6

EST

5

SVK

4

CZE

3
2

HUN

1

POL
LVA

LTU

-2

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

Real productivity growth

4.0

LVA

HUN

-4
-6
-8

LTU

-10
-5.0

0.0

5.0

10.0

15.0

BGR
6

EST

5

LTU

LVA

4
3
2

CZE

1

POL
ROM

0

0

POL

0

7

Real productivity growth, 2010

Real wage growth

BGR

ROM

EST

SVK

2

However, recent productivity increases ref lect
reduced employment rather than structural
ref orms.

9

7

BGR

SVN

Downturn unemployment increase (pps)
Bubble represents hourly wage

Real wage growth has broadly f ollowed
productivity.

8

ROM

6

BGR CZE EST HUN LVA LTU POL ROM SVK SVN

Real wage and productivity growth , 2007-10

Manufacturing
Retail Trade

0.0

1.0

SVK
HUN

2.0

3.0

4.0

Change in unemployment, 2009-10

Source: Eurostat.
1/ The downturn is def ined as 2008-10 and the boom the f our years preceeding the downturn.

5.0

27

Figure 5. Bulgaria: Fiscal Developments
Buoyant revenues prior to the crisis...
35

250

Lithuania

Poland

200

Slovak Rep
Czech Rep

25
Estonia

Expenditures, GDP, and CPI
(Index 2001 = 100)
Investment
Other
Benefits
Compensation
HICP
Nominal GDP

150

20
100
Bulgaria

15

Hungary

Bubble size indicates Imports
in percent of GDP

50

10
20

40
60
Real Domestic Demand Growth

4

Overall Balance
(Percent of GDP)

4

2004

2007

2010

...the f iscal def icit has now to adjust to the mediumterm objective af ter the deterioration in 2009.

Despite a history of surpluses...

6

0
2001

80

3

Net lending
(Percent of GDP)

3

2

2

1

2

0
-2
-4
-6

Bulgaria

-8

Euro area

12
2000

10

0

-2

2008

2012

-3
2006

2016

Public health deficit
Pension deficit

8
6
4
2
0
2035

2055

Source: WEO; Eurostat; IMF staf f estimates.

2007

2008

2009

-3
-4
-5
-6
2010

2011

2012

The FRA needs to be rebuilt to provide a buf f er
against potential shocks.

Public health and pension expenditures
(Percent of GDP)

2015

MTO (CP 2006-09)
MTO (CP 2007-10)
MTO (CP 2008-11)
MTO (CP 2009-12)
Actual (rhs)

-2

Ref orms are needed to prevent unsustainable
def icits f rom pension and health outlays.

14
12

-1

20
18
FRA (Percent of GDP )

16

2004

1

-1

NMS with fixed ER (Baltics, Slovakia,
Slovenia)

10

0

16
14

FRA and funding conditions
FRA
External yield (rhs)
Domestic yield (rhs)

10
9
8
7

12

6

10

5

8

4

6

3

4

2

2

1

0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

0

Yields

Real Revenue Growth

300

Real Revenue and Demand Growth
(2003-08)

30

...induced spending, in particular on wages
and benef its.

28
Figure 6. Bulgaria: Overview of Financial Stability Indicators in Emerging
Europe, 2008– 10
NPLs have risen...
25

...but provisions are still
above the regional average.
120

Non-performing loans
(in percent of total loans)

20

2008

15

2009

80

2010

60

10

Provisions
(in percent of NPLs)

2008

100

2009
2010

Profitability has declined markedly...

ROM
1/

BGR

SVK

LVA

CZE 1/

POL

HUN 1/

EST

CRO

LTU

LVA

ROM

BGR

CRO

CZE 1/

HUN

0

POL

0

SVK

20

EST

5

LTU

40

2

...but remains positive and above that of comparator countries..
30
Return on equity (in percent)
20

1

10

3

Return on assets (in percent)

0

0

-1

2008

-10

2008

-2

2009

-20

2009

-3

2010

-30

...while capital adequacy has increased...

25

2008

20

CZE 1/2/

SVK

POL 2/

BGR 2/

CRO

EST

HUN

ROM

LTU

2010

LVA

CZE 1/

CRO

SVK

POL

BGR

EST

HUN

-50

ROM

-5

LTU

-40

LVA

-4

...liquidity has risen but lags behind comparators. 3/
250

Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)

2009

Liquid assets to short-term liabilities
(in percent)
2008

200

2010

15

150

10

100

5

50

0

0

2009

Source: GFSR April 2011; National authorities; IMF staf f estimates.

1/ Latest observation: September 2010
2/ Tier 1 capital
3/ Liquid assets to short-term liabilities ratios may not be fully comparable across countries.
4/ Latest observation: September 2009
5/ Latest observation: March 2010
6/ 3-month ratio

ROM 6/

CZE 1/

LVA 5/

SVK 5/

LTU 5/

HUN

BGR

EST

POL 4/

EST

CRO

BGR

LTU

CZE 1/

ROM

LVA

HUN

POL

SVK 2/

2010

29

30

31
Table 3. Bulgaria: Real GDP Components, 2008–16
2008

2009

2010
Est.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

2016
Proj.

3.7
3.6
3.7
2.8
2.1
2.4
0.7
7.8
7.7
7.6
8.0
0.2
-0.2
4.8
4.5

3.8
3.7
4.0
2.0
2.6
3.2
-0.6
6.7
7.6
7.5
8.1
-0.1
-0.2
3.0
2.9

3.9
3.9
4.1
3.2
2.8
3.2
0.8
7.0
7.6
7.5
8.2
-0.1
-0.4
4.4
4.4

4.0
4.0
4.5
1.9
2.7
3.1
0.8
7.4
7.5
8.5
4.1
0.1
-0.4
5.2
5.1

3.9
3.3
0.5
1.7
1.6
0.1
2.1
2.0
1.5
0.5
0.2
-0.2
3.5
3.7

4.0
3.6
0.4
2.0
2.1
-0.1
1.9
2.1
1.6
0.5
-0.1
-0.2
2.3
2.4

4.3
3.7
0.6
2.2
2.1
0.1
2.0
2.1
1.6
0.5
-0.1
-0.4
3.3
3.7

4.4
4.0
0.4
2.1
2.0
0.1
2.2
2.2
1.9
0.3
0.1
-0.4
3.9
4.2

(Real growth rate by expenditure category, in percent)
Real GDP
Domestic demand
Private demand
Public demand
Final consumption
Private consumption
Public consumption
Investment
Gross fixed investment
Private investment
Public investment
Inventories 1/
Net exports 1/
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

6.2
6.4
7.5
1.2
2.6
3.4
-1.0
16.3
21.9
25.7
6.8
-0.8
-1.9
3.0
4.2

-5.5
-12.7
-13.2
-10.2
-7.4
-7.6
-6.5
-24.9
-17.6
-17.2
-19.2
-3.6
11.8
-11.2
-21.0

0.2
-4.5
-4.4
-5.0
-1.2
-1.2
-1.0
-14.0
-16.5
-16.6
-15.9
0.6
6.2
16.2
4.5

3.0
1.1
0.5
3.9
0.6
0.7
0.3
2.7
3.9
1.3
15.7
-0.2
0.8
9.1
7.0

3.5
3.3
2.4
7.8
1.5
1.2
3.2
9.0
8.5
5.4
20.9
0.2
-0.1
5.4
5.0

(Contribution to real GDP growth, in percent)
Domestic demand
Private demand
Public demand
Final consumption
Private consumption
Public consumption
Investment
Gross fixed investment
Private investment
Public investment
Inventories
Net exports
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

8.1
7.8
0.3
2.4
2.6
-0.2
5.7
6.4
6.0
0.4
-0.8
-1.9
2.0
3.9

-16.0
-13.9
-2.1
-6.5
-5.5
-0.9
-9.5
-5.9
-4.8
-1.2
-3.6
11.8
-7.0
-18.8

Source: Bulgaria National Statistical Institute (NSI); IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contributions to GDP growth.

-5.3
-4.3
-1.0
-1.0
-0.8
-0.1
-4.3
-4.9
-4.0
-0.8
0.6
6.2
9.6
3.4

1.2
0.5
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.7
1.0
0.3
0.7
-0.2
0.8
6.3
5.5

3.6
2.1
1.5
1.2
0.8
0.4
2.3
2.1
1.1
1.0
0.2
-0.1
3.9
4.0

32

33

Table 5a. Bulgaria: General Government Operations, 2008–16 1/
(In millions of leva)
2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

2016
Proj.

26,359
16,774
2,228
1,971
7,485
4,052
221
816
4,438
1,142
4,005

24,087
14,898
1,762
2,051
6,433
3,844
122
686
4,321
1,326
3,543

23,053
14,044
1,353
2,031
6,267
3,568
119
705
4,091
1,603
3,315

24,680
15,093
1,521
2,161
6,656
3,850
112
794
4,528
1,917
3,141

27,027
15,970
1,694
2,287
6,900
4,119
115
855
4,791
3,270
2,997

29,217
16,908
1,872
2,403
7,230
4,382
105
916
5,033
4,181
3,095

30,578
17,860
1,999
2,525
7,595
4,667
95
980
5,289
4,281
3,147

32,404
18,884
2,137
2,653
7,972
4,975
95
1,051
5,558
4,608
3,355

34,344
19,968
2,285
2,788
8,369
5,303
95
1,127
5,841
4,959
3,576

24,369
19,854
3,836
4,913
585
1,114
720
8,594
5,546
1,536
1,512
93
317
4,198

24,714
20,926
4,103
4,296
521
1,204
746
9,955
6,439
1,855
1,661
101
302
3,487

25,834
21,573
4,146
4,266
486
1,317
670
10,583
6,971
1,797
1,815
104
1,317
2,945

26,538
22,580
4,146
4,654
584
1,433
726
10,940
7,021
1,945
1,975
96
527
3,430

28,589
24,054
4,023
4,966
725
2,218
896
11,154
7,234
1,946
1,975
73
369
4,166

30,303
25,409
4,184
4,991
917
2,507
957
11,776
7,605
1,983
2,189
77
377
4,517

31,456
26,154
4,445
5,110
813
2,183
1,024
12,497
7,980
2,000
2,517
81
398
4,903

33,233
27,507
4,691
5,238
813
2,327
1,024
13,327
8,372
2,060
2,894
87
398
5,327

34,930
28,961
4,950
5,369
813
2,481
1,024
14,232
8,781
2,122
3,329
92
398
5,570

1,990
2,575

-627
-106

-2,781
-2,295

-1,858
-1,274

-1,562
-837

-1,086
-170

-878
-65

-829
-16

-586
227

(financed by)
Net acquisition of financial assets
Domestic
Foreign
Net incurrence of liabilities
Domestic
Foreign

…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…

-830
-1,050
220
1,950
1,569
381

-38
-306
268
1,820
1,012
808

2,823
2,534
289
4,385
1,566
2,819

895
607
288
1,982
1,206
776

977
612
364
1,855
1,200
655

1,066
689
377
1,895
1,000
895

2,698
2,333
364
3,283
2,388
895

Financial Balance Sheet
Financial assets
Currency and deposits
Loans
Debt securities
Equity and investment fund shares
Other financial assets
Financial liabilities
Currency and deposits
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Other liabilities

20,143
8,763
1,300
0
6,762
3,318
12,476
0
3,481
6,195
2,800

20,104
7,313
1,248
0
7,784
3,759
15,568
0
4,135
6,359
5,074

20,131
5,706
1,026
0
8,377
5,022
17,343
0
4,582
7,378
5,383

20,081
4,582
1,102
0
9,001
5,396
18,635
0
4,923
7,927
5,784

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

Memorandum items:
Net financial worth
Fiscal reserve account
Gross debt 6/
Foreign
Domestic

7,667
8,382
10,710
7,637
3,073

4,536
7,673
10,641
7,631
3,009

2,788
6,012
12,240
8,156
4,084

1,446
4,827
13,249
8,696
4,553

…
…
16,609
11,226
5,383

…
…
18,032
11,714
6,318

…
…
18,803
12,004
6,799

…
…
20,138
12,522
7,616

…
…
22,018
13,052
8,965

Statement of Operations
Revenue
Taxes
Taxes on profits
Taxes on income
Value-added taxes
Excises
Customs duties
Other taxes
Social contributions
Grants
Other revenue 2/
Expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Use of goods and services
Interest
Subsidies
Grants 3/
Social benefits
Pensions
Social assistance
Healthcare
Other expense
Contingency 4/
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets /5
Net lending/borrowing 1/
Primary balance

Source: Ministry of Finance; IMF staff estimates.
1/ On cash basis.
2/ Includes sales of fixed assets.
3/ Contribution to EU budget.
4/ The contingency reserve in 2010 includes BGN 527 mln in arrears repayment; 218 mln for road infrastructure; 45 mln for railway infrastructure;
116 mln for subsidies (mostly agriculture); 142 mln for social security; and 81 mln for natural disasters.
5/ Includes only acquisitions of nonfinancial assets, i.e. capital expenditure.
6/ Includes guarantees.

34
Table 5b. Bulgaria: General Government Operations, 2008–16
(In percent of GDP)
2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

2016
Proj.

38.0
24.2
3.2
2.8
10.8
5.8
0.3
1.2
6.4
1.6
5.8

35.3
21.8
2.6
3.0
9.4
5.6
0.2
1.0
6.3
1.9
5.2

32.7
19.9
1.9
2.9
8.9
5.1
0.2
1.0
5.8
2.3
4.7

32.7
20.0
2.0
2.9
8.8
5.1
0.1
1.1
6.0
2.5
4.2

33.5
19.8
2.1
2.8
8.5
5.1
0.1
1.1
5.9
4.0
3.7

34.1
19.7
2.2
2.8
8.4
5.1
0.1
1.1
5.9
4.9
3.6

33.6
19.6
2.2
2.8
8.3
5.1
0.1
1.1
5.8
4.7
3.5

33.4
19.5
2.2
2.7
8.2
5.1
0.1
1.1
5.7
4.8
3.5

33.2
19.3
2.2
2.7
8.1
5.1
0.1
1.1
5.6
4.8
3.5

35.2
28.7
5.5
7.1
0.8
1.6
1.0
12.4
8.0
2.2
2.2
0.1
0.5
6.1

36.2
30.6
6.0
6.3
0.8
1.8
1.1
14.6
9.4
2.7
2.4
0.1
0.4
5.1

36.7
30.6
5.9
6.1
0.7
1.9
1.0
15.0
9.9
2.6
2.6
0.1
1.9
4.2

35.2
29.9
5.5
6.2
0.8
1.9
1.0
14.5
9.3
2.6
2.6
0.1
0.7
4.5

35.4
29.8
5.0
6.1
0.9
2.7
1.1
13.8
9.0
2.4
2.4
0.1
0.5
5.2

35.4
29.7
4.9
5.8
1.1
2.9
1.1
13.7
8.9
2.3
2.6
0.1
0.4
5.3

34.5
28.7
4.9
5.6
0.9
2.4
1.1
13.7
8.8
2.2
2.8
0.1
0.4
5.4

34.3
28.4
4.8
5.4
0.8
2.4
1.1
13.7
8.6
2.1
3.0
0.1
0.4
5.5

33.8
28.0
4.8
5.2
0.8
2.4
1.0
13.8
8.5
2.1
3.2
0.1
0.4
5.4

2.9
3.7

-0.9
-0.2

-3.9
-3.3

-2.5
-1.7

-1.9
-1.0

-1.3
-0.2

-1.0
-0.1

-0.9
0.0

-0.6
0.2

(financed by)
Net acquisition of financial assets
Domestic
Foreign
Net incurrence of liabilities
Domestic
Foreign

…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…

-1.2
-1.5
0.3
2.8
2.2
0.5

0.0
-0.4
0.4
2.4
1.3
1.1

3.5
3.1
0.4
5.4
1.9
3.5

1.0
0.7
0.3
2.3
1.4
0.9

1.1
0.7
0.4
2.0
1.3
0.7

1.1
0.7
0.4
2.0
1.0
0.9

2.6
2.3
0.4
3.2
2.3
0.9

Financial Balance Sheet
Financial assets
Currency and deposits
Loans
Debt securities
Equity and investment fund shares
Other financial assets
Financial liabilities
Currency and deposits
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Other liabilities

29.1
12.6
1.9
0.0
9.8
4.8
18.0
0.0
5.0
8.9
4.0

29.4
10.7
1.8
0.0
11.4
5.5
22.8
0.0
6.1
9.3
7.4

28.6
8.1
1.5
0.0
11.9
7.1
24.6
0.0
6.5
10.5
7.6

26.6
6.1
1.5
0.0
11.9
7.1
24.7
0.0
6.5
10.5
7.7

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

Memorandum items:
Net financial worth
Fiscal reserve account
Gross debt 6/
Foreign
Domestic

11.1
12.1
15.5
11.0
4.4

6.6
11.2
15.6
11.2
4.4

4.0
8.5
17.4
11.6
5.8

1.9
6.4
17.5
11.5
6.0

…
…
20.6
13.9
6.7

…
…
21.0
13.7
7.4

…
…
20.6
13.2
7.5

…
…
20.8
12.9
7.9

…
…
21.3
12.6
8.7

Statement of Operations
Revenue
Taxes
Taxes on profits
Taxes on income
Value-added taxes
Excises
Customs duties
Other taxes
Social contributions
Grants
Other revenue 2/
Expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Use of goods and services
Interest
Subsidies
Grants 3/
Social benefits
Pensions
Social assistance
Healthcare
Other expense
Contingency 4/
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets /5
Net lending/borrowing 1/
Primary balance

Source: Ministry of Finance; IMF staff estimates.
1/ On cash basis.
2/ Includes sales of fixed assets.
3/ Contribution to EU budget.
4/ The contingency reserve in 2010 includes BGN 527 mln in arrears repayment; 218 mln for road infrastructure; 45 mln for railway infrastructure;
116 mln for subsidies (mostly agriculture); 142 mln for social security; and 81 mln for natural disasters.
5/ Includes only acquisitions of nonfinancial assets, i.e. capital expenditure.
6/ Includes guarantees.

35

36

Table 7. Bulgaria: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2008–11
(In percent)

Core indicators
Capital adequacy
Capital to risk-weighted assets
Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets
Asset quality
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital
Large exposures to capital
Earnings and profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity 1/
Net interest income to gross income
Noninterest expense to gross income
Personnel expense to total income
Trading and fee income to total income
Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities
Liquid assets to total liabilities
Encouraged indicators
Deposit-taking institutions
Capital to assets 2/
Trading income to total income
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Customer deposits to total (non-interbank) loans
Foreign currency denominated loans to total loans
Foreign currency denominated liabilities to total liabilities
Net open foreign-exchange position 3/

2008

2009
Dec

2010
Mar

2010
Jun

2010
Sep

2010
Dec

2011
March

14.9
11.2

17.0
14.0

18.3
15.2

18.0
15.2

17.8
15.3

17.5
15.2

17.7
15.4

2.5
4.3
70.3

6.4
15.1
58.7

7.8
18.3
60.4

9.5
22.4
66.8

10.6
24.8
71.7

11.9
28.1
87.9

12.9
30.8
88.9

2.1
23.1
75.1
49.9
19.0
23.9

1.1
10.2
75.1
50.0
18.4
23.6

1.0
8.8
75.6
49.1
18.5
24.0

1.0
9.1
75.3
49.8
18.4
24.1

0.9
8.2
75.0
48.8
18.2
24.2

0.9
7.9
74.2
49.1
17.8
24.7

0.9
8.0
75.9
49.9
18.7
22.5

19.1
26.6
22.6

18.8
26.6
21.8

19.1
26.8
22.1

19.0
26.8
22.0

19.0
26.9
21.9

20.9
30.1
24.2

20.9
30.6
24.3

8.5
2.8
38.2
84.8
56.9
60.0
…

10.8
4.2
36.9
83.0
58.6
64.4
…

11.0
5.3
37.7
85.6
59.5
63.0
…

10.9
4.9
37.0
86.1
60.1
62.1
…

10.7
4.8
37.3
85.5
60.9
60.8
…

10.5
5.4
36.3
87.8
61.3
58.6
…

10.6
3.4
37.5
90.3
61.6
57.6
…

Source: Bulgarian National Bank.
1/ Return on equity is calculated with Tier I as denominator.
2/ Capital to assets is based on Tier I capital.
3/ The net open foreign-exchange position regulation was ended in 2005.

37

38
APPENDIX I. EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSES
Private external debt increased rapidly during the last decade. Since 2003, private sector
debt increased from about 20 percent of GDP to more than 90 percent as of end-2010. On the
other hand, the public sector reduced its external debt from 35 percent of GDP in 2003 to
8 percent in 2010. As a result, public debt represents less than 8 percent of total external debt as
of end-2010.
Composition of External Debt: 2003
Intracompany
Lending
12.7

NonFinancial
Private
17.6

Banks
7.4

(Percent of total)

Gral.
Government
62.3

Composition of External Debt: 2010
(Percent of total)

Intracompany
Lending
40.2

Gral.
Government
7.8

Banks
18.7

NonFinancial
Private
33.3

The external adjustment associated with the global crisis, though, has started a gradual
deleveraging process. External debt peaked in 2009 at 108 percent of GDP. The rapid
adjustment in the current account deficit, though, has already resulted in a reduction of external
debt to 93½ percent of GDP at end-March. Medium term current account projections suggest
that this incipient deleveraging will continue in coming years, taking external debt to less than
70 percent of GDP by 2016. Remarkably, deleveraging in the baseline scenario takes place at a
slower phase than in the historical scenario, which shows that external debt may fall to about
60 percent of GDP by 2016. This is related to relative conservative growth assumptions
compared to the historical average.
About 40 percent of the external debt is intra-company lending, which reduces rollover
risks. Intra-company lending has been remarkably stable during the global financial crisis; as
companies have been able to tap new financing for larger amounts than the scheduled
amortizations, i.e. rollover rates for the period 2008–10 averaged 170 percent.
Different real and financial shocks may disrupt medium-term trajectories, but the
deleveraging process seems to be anchored over the medium term. Persistent ¼ standard
deviation shocks applied to the interest rate, the growth rate and the current account deficit
would shift the trajectory of the external debt upwards, taking it to 83 percent of GDP by 2016,
which would still imply a significant deleveraging in coming years.
Public debt remains at manageable levels. With gross debt below 20 percent of GDP,
Bulgaria’s indebtedness of the general government is low by international standards. Assuming
shocks to the baseline forecast, the debt ratio could increase significantly, but remains below
40 percent of GDP in all scenarios considered. However, risks remain from unaccounted
contingent liabilities and worse-than-assumed downside scenarios.

39
Figure 1. Bulgaria: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/ 2/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
110

Gross financing need
under baseline
Historical
(right
scale)

100
90

Baseline

80

Historical

60

100

50

90

40

80

30

70

20

60

61

60

10

50

2008

2010

i-rate
shock
Baseline

67

70

40
2006

70

110

2012

0
2016

2014

Growth shock (in percent per year)
110

110

67

50
40
2006

2008

2010

Baseline:

2.3

Scenario:

2.8

Historical:

3.2

2012

Growth
shock

90

2014

2016

Non-interest current account shock
(in percent of GDP)

100

100

69

CA shock

90
89

80

80

74

Baseline

70

50
40
2006

2008

2010

Baseline:

3.9

Scenario:

1.9

Historical:

4.1

2012

2014

67

70

67

60

Baseline

60
50

2016

40
2006

Combined shock 3/

Baseline:

-0.6

Scenario:

-5.3
-9.1

Historical:
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Real depreciation shock 4/
140

10

130

00

Combined
shock

90

30 %
depreciation

120
83

80

110
100

100

90

Baseline
70
67
60

80

Baseline

67

70
60

50

50

40
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

40
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks.
Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario
being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ For historical scenarios, the historical averages are calculated over the ten-year period, and the information is
used to project debt dynamics five years ahead.
3/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account
balance.
4/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2012.

40
Figure 2. Bulgaria: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
80

9
Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

70
60
50

7

30

5
3

20
10
0
-102006

1
2008

2010

-20

70
60

Baseline

40

80

2012
2014
Historical

2016
-1
-3

-30

Baseline:

2.0

Scenario:

3.0

Historical:

-1.3

50
40
i-rate
shock

30
20

22

Baseline 21

10
0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock (in percent per year)

80

80
70
60

Baseline:

3.8

Scenario:

1.9

Historical:

4.4

70
60

Baseline:

-0.6

Scenario:

-1.4

Historical:

2.9

50

50
Growth
shock

40

36

40

No policy change

PB shock

30

30
20

21
Baseline

10
0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

20
Baseline

10
2016

0
2006

37
25

2008

2010

2012

2014

21

2016

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
80

80

70

70

60

60

50

50

30 % real
depreciation

contingent
liabilities
shock

40

40
Combined
shock

30
20

Baseline

30

25
21

30
27

20

Baseline

21

10

10
0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2010, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

41

Table 2. Bulgaria: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2008–16
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2009

2010

2011

2012

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
Of which foreign-currency denominated

15.5
11.0

15.6
11.2

17.4
11.6

17.5
11.5

20.6
13.9

21.0
13.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Of which: Privatization receipts (negative)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

-3.1
-7.4
-3.7
38.0
34.3
-2.4
-1.6
-0.6
-1.0
-0.9
1.3
-0.8
4.3

0.1
-1.5
0.2
35.3
35.4
0.2
0.9
0.1
0.8
-0.7
1.9
-0.1
1.7

1.8
1.8
3.3
32.7
36.0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.0
...
1.7
-0.1
0.0

0.2
0.6
1.7
32.7
34.4
-0.2
-0.2
0.1
-0.3
...
0.9
-0.6
-0.4

3.0
-0.4
1.0
33.5
34.5
-0.3
-0.3
0.3
-0.7
...
1.1
-0.2
3.4

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

40.6

44.2

53.1

53.7

...
...

...
...

17.6
17.6

6.0
5.2
-3.2
7.0
8.4
7.6

-5.0
4.9
0.6
5.7
4.3
-2.5

0.0
4.6
1.6
...
3.0
1.7

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010-2016

Projections
2013
2014

2015

2016

20.6
13.2

20.8
12.9

21.3
12.6

0.5
-1.1
0.2
34.1
34.3
-0.2
-0.2
0.6
-0.8
...
1.1
-0.1
1.6

-0.4
-1.6
0.1
33.6
33.6
-0.6
-0.6
0.4
-1.0
...
1.1
0.0
1.2

0.1
-1.4
0.0
33.4
33.4
-0.4
-0.4
0.3
-0.8
...
1.0
0.0
1.5

0.5
-0.7
-0.2
33.2
33.0
-0.5
-0.5
0.3
-0.8
...
0.0
0.0
1.2

61.5

61.7

61.5

62.1

64.1

12.5
19.5

10.8
24.2

7.5
27.5

4.4
30.1

1.7
33.3

-0.2
36.9

2.0
4.7
0.7
...
4.0
-1.6

4.0
5.4
2.0
...
3.4
3.9

4.0
5.6
3.3
...
2.3
3.1

5.0
4.6
2.2
...
2.4
1.8

3.9
4.4
1.9
...
2.5
3.2

4.0
4.1
1.6
...
2.5
2.7

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline 8/
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 9/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)

Sources: WEO; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Gross debt including guarantees.
2/ Derived as [(r - (1+g - g + (1+r]/(1+g++g)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate;  = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate;  = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and  = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Note: Based on WEO and may differ from staff projections in the report.
9/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
10/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/
0.6

42

2008

0.0
-0.9

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BULGARIA
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department
June 15, 2011

Contents

I.
II.
III.

Page

Financial Position in the Fund .......................................................................................2
World Bank Relations ....................................................................................................3
Statistical Issues .............................................................................................................8

2

I. BULGARIA: FINANCIAL POSITION IN THE FUND
(As of April 30, 2011)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: September 25, 1990;

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota

Article VIII
SDR Million
640.20

%Quota
100.00

606.22

94.69

34.01

5.31

Fund holdings of currency (Exchange Rate)
Reserve Tranche Position
III.

SDR Department:

SDR Million

%Allocation

Net cumulative allocation

610.88

100.00

Holdings

610.89

100.00

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None
V.

VI.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Date of
Expiration
Amount Approved
Amount Drawn
Type
Arrangement
Date
(SDR Million)
(SDR Million)
Stand-By
Aug 06, 2004
Mar 31, 2007
100.00
0.00
Stand-By
Feb 27, 2002
Mar 15, 2004
240.00
240.00
EFF
Sep 25, 1998
Sep 24, 2001
627.62
627.62
Projected Payments to Fund 1/
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Principal
Charges/Interest
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
Total
1/
When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount
of such arrears will be shown in this section.
VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not Applicable
VIII. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): Not Applicable
IX.

Exchange Arrangements

The currency of Bulgaria is the lev. Since July 1, 1997, the Bulgarian National Bank has operated a
currency board arrangement. From July 1, 1997 to December 31, 1998, the lev was pegged to the Deutsche
Mark at BGN 1000 per Deutsche Mark. Since January 1, 1999 the lev has been pegged to the euro at BGN
1.95583 per euro. Bulgaria joined the European Union (EU) on January 1, 2007. Bulgaria has accepted the
obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2–4, and maintains an exchange system free of restriction on the making
of payments and transfers for current international transfers.
X.

Resident Representative

Mr. Lybek is the Regional Resident Representative, based in Bucharest. He took up the position on
March 31, 2009.

3

II. BULGARIA: IMF-WORLD BANK RELATIONS
A. Partnership in Bulgaria’s Development Strategy
1.
The World Bank has been leading the policy dialogue in structural and
institutional reforms aimed at Bulgaria’s successful EU integration and convergence.
On May 17, 2011 the Board of Directors discussed the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
of the Bank which outlined the roadmap for the Bank’s country support for the period
2011-13. The CPS maintains a strong focus on Bulgaria making the most of its EU
membership. It aims to partner with Bulgaria in strengthening national institutions and
capacity to meet EU targets and in accelerating the absorption of EU grant funds. The
objective of the CPS is to support Bulgaria in strengthening institutions and policies to
achieve smart, sustainable, and inclusive growth. The CPS proposes a program dominated by
knowledge and advisory services complemented by a modest lending program. World Bank
knowledge and advisory services would focus on policy reforms, sector strategies and strengthening
institutional capacity for increased EU funds absorption. Activities within the ongoing lending

portfolio from the previous CPS are being also realigned to support Bulgaria’s EU funds
absorption priority. A railway reform support financing package composed of a series of
three DPLs and an investment loan complementary to EU funding are included in the
indicative lending program. World Bank potential financial support will be discussed upon
the Government’s request, with priority given to results based lending. The Bank will
continue to undertake substantial knowledge and advisory services on policy reforms in select
sectors and themes of Bulgaria’s National Reform Program 2011-2015 such as innovation, education,
business regulation, transport, and water, green growth, and social inclusion.

B. IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
2.
The Fund team led by Ms. Purfield (mission chief) met with the World Bank
Bulgaria team led by Mr. Harrold (Country Director of Central/South Europe and
Baltics) in October 2010, to identify macro-critical structural reforms and to coordinate
the two teams’ work for the period October 2010–September 2011. A meeting was also
held with the WB country manager, Mr. Repnik (October 1) in Bulgaria. This memo has
been updated in the context of discussions for the Article IV consultation
3.
Bulgaria’s main macroeconomic challenges are to maintain confidence in the
currency board arrangement by pursuing prudent fiscal policies, ensuring financial
system stability, and shifting growth towards the tradable sector. Fiscal discipline will be
key to supporting the currency board arrangement. Continued prudent regulation and
adequate capital buffers will help maintain financial system stability, while improvements in
the business climate will facilitate more sustainable tradable-based growth.
4.
Based on this shared assessment, the teams identified five structural reform
areas as macrocritical in view of their central role in achieving fiscal consolidation and
enhancing growth.

4



EU funds absorption. Increased absorption of EU funds through improvements of
administrative capacity and upgrading planning, execution, and monitoring systems
will play a vital role. Rationalization of public administration through elimination of
unnecessary or duplicated units and restructuring staff will also be important.



Pension reform. The combination of large pension increases and reductions in social
security contributions rates in the past has widened the gap between pension
contributions and expenditures. Key elements of reform are: (i) slowing of pension
increases; (ii) adjustment of pension parameters; (iii) addressing underreporting of
insurable income.



Healthcare reform. Mispricing and other distorted incentives have created financing
pressures for the public health insurance fund, calling for a comprehensive reform
focusing on efficiency and quality of the system – including through rationalizing inpatient care.



Education reform. Building on past achievement, education reforms should focus on
improving results. The areas of reform include measures to enhance the quality of
student learning and to improve access to education.



Shifting growth towards the tradable sector. With the end of the domestic demand
boom, the engine of Bulgaria’s growth will need to shift towards exports. Moderate
wage growth, improved labor market flexibility, and strengthening the business
environment by cutting red tape and reducing the regulatory costs for doing business
are called for to facilitate the shift.



Development of basic infrastructure and energy. Sustaining development of basic
infrastructure and energy are a high priority to reduce costs of the transport network,
to strengthen energy security, and hence improve competitiveness of the economy.

5.
The teams agreed that the Bank and the Fund share responsibility on financial
sector issues, revenue administration, and pension reforms, while the Bank will lead EU
funds absorption, basic infrastructure, business environment, education reforms, and
social inclusion. Both teams will keep the other apprised of upcoming missions and
assessments. World Bank country economists participated in both the October 2010 IMF
Staff Visit and the May 2011 Article IV Consultation and the IMF have assisted with World
Bank work on competitiveness.

5

Appendix 1. Bulgaria: Bank and Fund activities in macro-critical structural reform areas,
May 2010- June 2011.
Work Program
Bank

Products
Gas Sector Policy Issues
(analytic work)
Poverty & Social Policy
Monitoring (analytic work)
Water Sector Strategy (advisory)

Delivery Date
Implementation
through September
2011
June 2011
May 2011

Education Sector (analytic work)

June 2011

Competitiveness Through
Innovation (analytic work)

Implementation
through November
2011

Technical assistance on pensions
(analytic work and workshops)

April 2011

MAC-Public Finance for Growth June 2011
and Competitiveness (analytic
work)
Railway Sector Development
Policy Loan (lending)
Fund

Staff visit to provide input for
2011 budget

Mandate for
negotiations expected
in June 2011
September 23 -October
4, 2010

TA provision on pension reform
-‘Bulgaria- Reforming the
pension system’ report issued in
November 2010

October 13-26, 2010

Article IV Consultation- Board
meeting scheduled on July 1,
2011

May 10-20, 2011

6

C. The World Bank Group Strategy and Lending Operations
6.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Bulgaria1, discussed by the Bank’s
Board on May 17, 2011, is anchored in Bulgaria’s National Reform Program to implement
the Europe 2020 Strategy and focused on three main pillars: (i) policy reforms for National
Reform Program to implement Europe 2020 Strategy, (ii) strategies and institutions to
accelerate EU funds absorption, and (iii) complementing EU financing.
7.
The current active Bank portfolio in Bulgaria consists of 4 operations at the total
amount of US$ 353 equivalent. The World Bank’s lending program in Bulgaria to date
comprises 46 IBRD operations with a total original commitment of US$3,003 million
equivalent, consisting of 15 adjustment loans (US$1,725.8 million), 24 investment projects
(US$1123 million), one debt reduction loan (US$125 million), four Bank-managed Global
Environmental Fund (GEF) grants, and two Bank-managed Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF)
operations. Of these 46 operations, 42 have been completed, of which 13 have been fully or
partially cancelled during implementation, and 4 operations are currently under
implementation (Table 1).
Table 1. Bulgaria: Active World Bank Operations (Net of Cancellations)
Operation

US$ million

Board Date

1.

Second Trade and Transport Facilitation in Southeast Europe (TTFSE 2)

52.8

2007

2.

Road Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project

122.5

2007

3.

Social Inclusion Project

59.0

2008

Municipal Infrastructure Development Project

118.7

2009

4.

8.
Economic and Sector Work. The country diagnostic work recently completed by the
Bank focuses on assessing the quality of education in Bulgaria and review of the Bulgaria’s
school autonomy reform, long-term care policies for older populations, and better regulation
topical studies on: (i) administrative and regulatory barriers to business, (ii) ex-post impact
assessment of the Act on Limiting Administrative Regulation and Administrative Control on
Economic Activity, and (iii) reforming the regime of state fees.
9.
As of April 30, 2011, IFC has 30 projects (completed and ongoing) in Bulgaria
with total commitments of over US$ 660 million. The single biggest investment of IFC in
the country is in the field of renewable energy in the form of a loan for the construction of
the largest wind park in Bulgaria. IFC is also involved in the development of the Galata gas
field near the Black sea cost. In line with IFC’s strategic goals for Bulgaria, IFC has
supported a company investing in agricultural land and promoting land consolidation. In the
financial sector, IFC is supporting two specialized SME banks; it established Bulgaria’s first
1 International Bank for Reconstruction And Development and International Finance Corporation Country
Partnership Strategy for Bulgaria for the period 2011-2013, April 20, 2011.

7

micro-lending bank and has invested in a venture fund, which is also targeting the SME
sector. In other industries, IFC had contributed to key manufacturing projects in the
country— it has supported the modernization and expansion of an electronics producer, a
large steel mill, and two glass processing plants. Some IFC projects entail an important
environmental component. One of the manufacturing plants, for example, is purchasing
equipment which would reduce its GHG emissions and the electronics producing company is
making sensors for cars that monitor the emission of polluting gases and improve fuel
efficiency.
Questions may be referred to Ms. Stella Ilieva (322-504-0998) and Ms. Sylvia Stoynova
(3592-9697-220).

8

III. BULGARIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Data provision is generally adequate for surveillance purposes. Bulgaria participates in the
SDDS since 2003.
Real sector
1.
The National Statistical Institute (NSI) is responsible for compiling national accounts,
based on a system consistent with the System of National Accounts 1993 (SNA 1993) and the
European System of Accounts 1995. GDP data by activity and expenditure categories are
compiled and reconciled within an annual supply and use framework. However, government
output and final consumption are estimated on a cash basis. In addition, published national
accounts include current and capital accounts for the five main domestic sectors (general
government and its sub-sectors, financial corporations, nonfinancial corporations, nonprofit
institutions serving households, and households). Financial accounts and balance sheets by
institutional sectors and sub-sectors are compiled on annual basis since 2006. Quarterly
financial accounts and balance sheets are prepared by Bulgarian National Bank.
2.
The NSI has compiled estimates of quarterly GDP by the production and expenditure
approaches in current and constant prices since 1994. The preliminary flash estimates of
GDP and its components by production and expenditure side are produced and disseminated
45 days after the reference period. The quarterly updates are disseminated 70 days after the
end of the reference quarter with final figures disseminated after approximately 5 quarters.
The annual data are disseminated about 5 quarters after the end of the reference year. The
estimates at constant prices, which follow international standards, use chain-linked indices.
Problems remain in the coverage of private sector activities as well as regarding constant
price estimates of capital formation and external trade, although progress has been made in
the development of export and import deflators.
3.
On price data, the NSI produces a domestic consumer price index (CPI), a
harmonized consumer price index (HICP) according to Eurostat methods, and a producer
price index (PPI). All are updated monthly. The CPI series begins in 1995, the PPI in 2000
and the HCPI in 2005 (for earlier years it is set equal to the CPI). The coverage of the CPIs
was extended, although they still exclude some important sectors, mainly owner-occupied
housing and health and life insurance. Since 2004, financial services are included. Currently,
work has started on inclusion of owner-occupied housing in CPI within a Eurostat project.
The geographical coverage of the index is restricted to 27 urban areas that account for an
estimated 65 percent of sales.
4.
The flow of customs data has improved significantly in recent years and a new system
for processing customs records is near completion. The development of export and import
unit value indices is progressing smoothly and additional support is expected from Eurostat
in this area. The current indices are used as deflators for the import and export components of
the national accounts. The Import and Export Division of the NSI meets monthly with the

9

BNB to review data issues and ensure consistency between the NSI export and import data
and the balance of payments data.
5.
The national account data on employment and hours worked are compiled by the NSI
based on Labor Force Survey and adjusted according to the ESA’95 methodology. The NSI
also obtains current monthly estimates from a quarterly survey of establishments using all
public enterprises and a sample of private employers that excludes establishments with less
than five employees. The sample included 14,500 private employers out of approximately
142,000 qualifying private enterprises. The NSI household labor force survey is an
alternative source of data, but improvements are needed to make it more consistent with the
establishment survey, especially regarding agricultural employment. The survey is conducted
four times a year.
6.
The NSI also compiles and publishes wage data for various economic sectors. The
main shortcomings include: (i) under-reporting of private sector wages; and (ii) reporting of
average gross earnings only, not wages for time worked and wages by occupation.
Since 2002, every four years a survey on earnings is conducted which provides information
about average monthly and hourly earnings by economic activity, by occupation, by gender
and by education. The National Social Security Institute (NSSI) administrative data are
currently used to estimate wages by occupation and age (as well as the number of selfemployed and employment in small firms). The household budget survey could provide an
alternative source of data for private sector wages.
7.
A Population Census was conducted in early 2001 and is a source for redesigning the
household surveys conducted by the NSI, particularly the household budget survey and the
labor force survey.
Government finance
8.
In recent years, following the recommendations of a combined STA/FAD mission
and within the framework of fiscal reporting requirements for EU accession, the authorities
have made significant progress on implementing accrual accounting for government,
budgetary and statistical systems. Consolidated data on a cash basis, covering general and
central government operations, are routinely reported for publication in the GFS
Yearbook/Annual CD-ROM and in IFS. In addition, quarterly accrual GFS data are reported
on a quarterly basis for publication in IFS, through Eurostat. Since September 2008, the
Ministry of Finance (MOF) prepares and submits the SDDS indicators for the central
government finances in the IMF’s GFSM 2001 format. The same indicators are published on
the MOF’s website on a monthly and quarterly basis.
9.
The Ministry of Finance prepares data on the execution of the consolidated
government budget on a monthly basis, following the national presentation. These data are
not according to GFS standards. Aggregate data on revenue, expenditure, balance of the
general government and composition of the financing (in national formats) are published in

10

the monthly bulletin and posted on the MOF’s website, in addition to the GFSM 2001 data.
The authorities have made progress in presenting data on a disaggregated basis, including
expenditure by functional classification. In addition, a full economic classification of
expenditure is now available, and the authorities have provided such data on an annual basis
back to 1998.
Money and banking statistics
10.
BNB reports monetary data for publication in IFS based on the ECB framework for
the collection and compilation of monetary data.
Balance of payments
11.
Bulgaria provides quarterly balance of payments (BOP) statistics for dissemination in
the IFS on a timely basis. Yearly BOP data are disseminated in the Balance of Payments
Statistics Yearbook up to 2009. The BNB derives other sectors investment income data on
reinvested earnings, (debit) from the annual direct investment surveys of the NSI, as well as
through surveys of the largest foreign-owned enterprises, used for preliminary estimates.
Starting from 2002, data series on freight were revised according to a new methodology
introduced jointly by the BNB and the NSI. Since joining the EU in January 2007, the trade
data with EU countries are being collected following the INTRASTAT system. Data
collection for imports and exports with non-EU member states and the movement of goods
within the EU are still recorded through customs declaration.

Table 1. Bulgaria: Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of May 23, 2011
Date of latest observation

Date received

Frequency
of

Frequency
of

data

reporting

6

6

6

publication

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

A

A

A

04/26/2011

M

M

M

Dec 2010

04/26/2011

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

2010 Q4

04/12/2011

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2010 Q4

04/12/2011

Q

Q

Q

2011 Q1 (flash estimate)

05/13/2011

Q

Q

Q

2010 Q4

04/12/2011

Q

Q

Q

May 2011

05/19/2011

April 2011

05/20/2011

Reserve/Base Money

March 2011

04/27/2011

Broad Money

March 2011

04/27/2011

April 2011

04/27/2011

March 2011

04/27/2011

March 2011

04/29/2011

April 2011

05/12/2011

Dec 2010

04/26/2011

Dec 2010

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the
1

Data Quality –
Methodological soundness

M

Exchange Rates

Memo Items:

Frequency of

7

Data Quality Accuracy
8

and reliability

Monetary Authorities

Central Bank Balance Sheet
Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System
Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index
3

Financing – General Government

4

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3

Financing – General Government

4

Stocks of General Government and General GovernmentGuaranteed Debt

5

GDP
Gross External Debt
1

2

O, O, O, O, O

O, LO, O, O

LO, LO, O, O, O

O, LO, O, LO

LO, O, O, O, NO

LNO, LO, O, LO

LNO, LNO, LNO, LO, LO

O, LO, O, LO

O, O, O, O, O

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions. Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on
treasury bills, notes and bonds. 3 Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing. 4 On a gross cash basis. The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra
budgetary funds, and social security funds) and local governments. 5 Including currency and maturity composition. 6 Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not
Available (NA). 7 Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published in December 2003, which is based on the findings of the mission that took place during January 15-30, 2003 for the
dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively) concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and
basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO). 8 Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning
(respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.

11

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of

O, O, LO, LO

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation with
Bulgaria

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/85
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 8, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

On June 29, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Bulgaria.1
Background
Bulgaria’s recovery from crisis has been marked by remarkable adjustment. After
contracting 5.5 percent in 2009, the economy stabilized in 2010 growing 0.2 percent on
the back of strong export growth. Bulgaria’s exports, which benefited from revived global
demand and high international commodities prices, recovered to pre-crisis levels.
Imports, however, remained subdued in line with depressed domestic demand
stemming from high unemployment and economic uncertainty. The accompanying
adjustment in external imbalances reduced the current account deficit from 23 to
1 percent of GDP between 2008 and 2010. With considerable slack in the economy,
core inflation averaged one percent in 2010, but rising energy and food prices drove
average headline inflation to 3 percent.
Strong policy action and large fiscal and financial sector buffers helped Bulgaria weather
the crisis well. Past fiscal surpluses saved in the fiscal reserve account boosted
international reserves, underpinned confidence in the currency board arrangement, and
financed recent deficits (3.9 percent in 2010, cash-basis). This combined with the
prompt action to adjust government spending to the decline in revenues contained the
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
fiscal deficit and debt, and created the conditions for a quick exit from EU excessive
deficit procedure. In the financial sector, non-performing loans had risen to 12.9 percent
by end-March 2011. However, the capital adequacy ratio remained high at 17.7 percent
and the banking system was profitable. Bulgaria’s high level of capital and conservative
regulatory regime going into the crisis enabled the BNB to ease its regulatory
requirements allowing banks to utilize some of their capital and provisioning buffers to
absorb losses.
The recovery is expected to broaden to domestic demand. In 2011, real GDP is
projected to rise to 3 percent as continued strong export growth stimulates investment.
As unemployment gradually declines, consumption will also gain momentum allowing
real GDP to recover its pre-crisis levels in 2012. Pressures from food and energy price
increases are expected to ease in the latter half of the year helping contain average
HICP inflation to 4¼ percent in 2011. Over the medium term, growth is expected to
recover to about 4 percent reflecting the rebalancing between domestic and external
demand. Against this backdrop, the current account deficit is expected to be contained
to moderate levels.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for sound policies that helped Bulgaria
weather the global crisis and paved the way for the export-led recovery underway. The
challenge going forward will be to rebuild policy buffers to address external risks, and to
speed up the pace of reforms to boost economic resilience and medium-term growth
prospects.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ 2011 deficit target, which implies a timely exit from
the EU’s excessive deficit procedure. They noted that strengthening tax compliance and
resisting spending pressures in the run up to elections are essential to achieve this
target, and were reassured by the authorities’ intention to take additional measures, if
necessary.
Directors emphasized that, over the medium term, it will be important to improve the
quality and durability of the fiscal consolidation effort. Deeper reforms in health, public
administration, and pensions would free policy space, improve service delivery, and
address aging-related pressures. Directors supported the proposed Financial Stability
Pact, and encouraged the adoption of a complementary fiscal rule that could help avoid
policy pro-cyclicality. A few Directors encouraged the authorities to pursue more
ambitious medium-term fiscal goals, given the need to reconstitute fiscal buffers.
Directors noted that the banking system remains well-capitalized, liquid, and stable, but
recommended continued vigilance to head off potential risks. Directors welcomed the
improvement in liquidity indicators at banks, but noted the relatively high level of
non-performing loans and, in some cases, the continued reliance on support from parent

3
institutions abroad. In light of the linkages with fiscally distressed euro-area economies,
Directors saw merit in further developing contingency plans and back-stop
arrangements, and, more broadly, encouraged the authorities to continue to monitor
closely the banking system in coordination with home supervisors. In addition, the
easing of prudential regulations implemented during the crisis should be reversed and
the corporate debt resolution framework should be strengthened.
Directors considered that stepped up structural reforms hold the key to improved growth
prospects. Taking note of the staff’s assessment that the exchange rate is broadly in line
with medium-term fundamentals, they stressed that wage growth should be better
aligned with productivity developments to safeguard competitiveness. Initiatives
underway to reduce skills mismatch, decrease administrative burdens, strengthen the
legal system, and improve the absorption of EU funds will also be essential to the
achievement of a higher growth path.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

Table 1. Bulgaria: Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 2008–12
2008
Output, prices, and labor market
Real GDP
Real domestic demand
Consumer price index (HICP, average)
Consumer price index (HICP, end of period)
Unemployment rate 1/
Nominal wages 2/
General government finances
Revenue
Expenditure
Net lending/borrowing 3/
Privatization proceeds
External financing
Domestic financing
Net lending and other items
Gross debt (excluding guarantees) 4/
Money and credit
Broad money (M3)
Domestic credit
o/w Domestic private credit
Interest rates
Euro, 6-month LIBOR
Interbank rate, 3-month SOFIBOR
Lending rate

6.2
6.4
12.0
7.2
5.7
16.5
38.0
35.2
2.9
0.8
-1.0
-2.7
…
13.7
8.8
33.0
31.6

2009

2010
2011
Est.
Proj.
(Annual percentage change)
-5.5
0.2
3.0
-12.7
-4.5
1.1

2012
Proj.

2.5
3.0
4.2
1.6
4.4
3.4
6.9
10.3
9.7
8.6
6.0
6.0
(In percent of GDP)
35.3
32.7
32.7
36.2
36.7
35.2
-0.9
-3.9
-2.5
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.9
0.2
0.6
-0.1
3.7
2.6
…
-1.1
-0.9
14.6
16.2
16.6
(Annual percentage change)
4.2
6.4
9.5
6.8
5.1
7.2
3.8
1.3
5.0

3.1
2.8
9.0
5.9

(In percent)
0.8

3.5
3.3

33.5
35.4
-1.9
0.2
3.0
0.8
0.1
19.3
8.9
7.3
5.5

4.6

1.2

1.7

2.6

7.1

5.7

4.1

…

…

10.9

11.3

11.1

…

…

Real lending rate (HICP adjusted)
-1.0
8.6
7.9
…
…
Balance of payments
(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance
-23.0
-8.9
-1.0
-0.6
-1.0
Merchandise trade balance
-24.3
-11.9
-6.7
-5.8
-5.9
Capital and financial account balance
33.2
4.8
0.8
2.2
5.1
Foreign direct investment balance
17.5
7.2
4.0
4.0
4.0
International investment position
-97.5
-101.9
-97.6
-91.8
-86.2
Gross official reserves
35.9
37.0
36.0
35.3
37.2
Gross external debt
104.9
108.0
101.8
94.2
90.6
Exchange rates
Leva per euro
Currency board peg to euro at lev 1.95583 per euro
Leva per U.S. dollar (end of period)
1.39
1.36
1.47
…
…
Real effective exchange rate
CPI based (percentage change)
8.5
2.1
1.4
2.8
1.5
GDP deflator based (percentage change)
6.4
3.2
1.6
2.7
1.9
Social Indicators (reference year in parentheses)
Per capita GNI (Atlas method, 2009): US $6060; Poverty rate (2008): 21.8 percent;
Life expectancy at birth (2008): 73.3 years; Mortality under 5 (per 1,000) (2009): 10; Fertility rate
per woman (2008): 1.478
Income distribution (Gini index, 2008): 33.5; Primary education completion rate (2008): 89.9
Sources: Bulgarian authorities; IMF staff estimates; World Development Indicators database; and CIA World Factbook
1/ As percent of labor force.
2/ National accounts definition.
3/ On cash basis
4/ General government consolidated gross debt as reported under the ESA95 definition.

Statement by Mr. Age Bakker, Executive Director for Bulgaria
And Tsvetan Manchev, Adivsor to the Executive Director
June 29, 2011
The Bulgarian authorities remain committed to prudent macroeconomic policies which
promote sustainable growth. They appreciate the constructive dialogue with the Fund and
broadly share the staff’s policy advice as presented in the Article IV report.
Recent Macroeconomic Developments
Since the last Article IV consultation, the authorities have made substantial policy efforts.
The economy has demonstrated considerable agility, resulting in the closing of external
imbalances and recovery from the crisis. Q1 GDP growth, led by high net export growth,
reached 3.4 percent year-on-year (0.6 percent quarter-on-quarter). Domestic demand remains
suppressed.
Labor productivity has increased from the beginning of the year, following the rise in
unemployment and subsequent moderation in wage growth. This has boosted further the
competitiveness of the Bulgarian economy. Since February 2011 the current account, on a
12-month moving basis, turned positive, for the first time in many years. The current account
showed a surplus of 0.6 percent of GDP for January-April 2011 against a deficit of 2 percent
of GDP for January-April 2010. At the same time foreign direct investment, which had
fueled pre-crisis growth, decreased, mainly due to net payments on intercompany credits in
accordance with loan repayment schedules.
After a period of acceleration in the latter part of 2010 and the beginning of 2011 due to the
base effect from an excise hike on tobacco and alcohol, HICP inflation decelerated to 3.4
percent in May. The pressures from the recent surge in world energy prices are easing,
following the gentlemen’s agreement between the government and “Lukoil Bulgaria” which
led to a 2.6 percent monthly decline in retail fuel prices in May. Although still contributing
significantly to HICP inflation, the growth of food prices also decelerated last month. After
two years of decline real estate prices are showing signs of stabilization.
The authorities are cognizant that the sustainability of the recovery faces challenges, many of
which are of an external nature, but they remain optimistic. They monitor the EU-IMF
comprehensive response and financial assistance to the Euro Area periphery and believe that
it will help in containing these risks. The authorities are committed to further accelerate
structural reforms and boost competitiveness as designed in the recent update of the National
Reform Program (NRP). The strong commitment of all political players to the Currency
Board Arrangement (CBA) - supported by a more than adequate reserve level (coverage of
imports of above 6.5 months) - is an additional buffer against shocks.

2
Fiscal Policy
The authorities are well aware that fiscal policy remains a crucial shock absorber. They used
the 2011 rebound of the economy for implementing another round of fiscal consolidation to
bring the deficit further down. On the revenue side, tax policies remain broadly unchanged as
part of the strategy to provide businesses a stable and predictable environment. The
restructuring of tax and customs administration will lead to greater efficiency of tax
collection and eradication of financial fraud and tax evasion. On the expenditure side, the
authorities’ strategy envisages a continued real contraction of spending to the lower levels of
post-boom revenues. The contraction is pursued by the imposition of tight ceilings, including
wage and pension bill freezes.
Performance up till now suggests that the 2011 deficit target of 2.5 percent of GDP (ESA 95
methodology) will be met, which would secure a pronounced exit from the EU excessive
deficit procedure. In case of deterioration of the external environment or of revenue
performance in the second half of the year, the authorities are committed to consider
additional measures. The fiscal reserve has served the authorities well as a liquidity buffer
during the crisis and in their view remains sufficient to meet their needs. They plan to rebuild
the reserve over time, but do not consider substantial debt issuance in 2011.
As part of the long-term strategy toward fiscal sustainability the authorities have initiated the
introduction of the Financial Stability Pact. The government submitted a draft for
constitutional and legislative amendments to Parliament. Although not included in the current
version of the Pact, the alternative fiscal rules proposed by the Fund are being carefully
analyzed in the Ministry of Finance and may be incorporated during the next round of
discussions in September 2011. The current version of the Pact envisages a deficit ceiling,
which is set tighter than that of the EU Stability and Growth Pact, together with an upper
limit of expenditures to 40 percent of GDP and subjects changes in direct taxes to a
constitutional majority vote.
Monetary and Macro-prudential Policies and Financial Sector Development
The CBA has proved its flexibility and sustainability both during the boom prior to the crisis
and in the cyclical downturn. It has continuous support from macro-prudential policies. The
BNB recently increased from 6 to 12 months the term for realization of collateral provided in
the form of buildings or land. This will have an anti-cyclical effect, taking into consideration
the current liquidity conditions in the real estate market and the need to preserve flexible
relations with bank customers facing temporary liquidity problems. In thus balancing the
need to alleviate banks’ capital position and preserve capital buffers so far accumulated, the
BNB preserves the consistent conservative nature of its supervisory policy.

3
The financial system, dominated by the banking sector, remains stable, well capitalized and
highly liquid, and so are individual banks. By the end of Q1 2011, the banking system’s
capital adequacy ratio was 17.7 percent, with Tier 1 at 15.4 percent. As of 30 April 2011, the
liquid asset ratio preserved its high level at 23.7 percent. Of course, in the highly uncertain
international environment, the authorities monitor the situation very closely on a day-to-day
basis. They have intensified contacts with bank management and home country supervisors
and have increased the frequency of reporting.
The strong and persistent risk-aversion of the supervisory authorities has led to a more
diversified funding structure with less reliance on foreign funding in the post-crisis period.
Deposits of households have continued to increase and most recent developments suggest
stabilization of asset quality. The rates of increase in impairment costs and specific
provisions for credit risk were similar in April to those registered in January. The banks have
weathered the crisis relatively well because of the years of conservative provisioning and
stringent evaluation of collateral. Operating revenue has exceeded operating expenses and
impairment costs during the downturn, and the majority of the banks remain profitable.
The restructuring among small banks has progressed well and they have resumed credit
growth. The 0.8 percent monthly increase in corporate lending in April was the biggest
monthly increase since the beginning of the year. Lending to households remained largely
flat. The market share of small and medium-sized banks has continued to increase steadily.
The domestic wholesale banking market remains stable with the overnight money market
interest rate currently below 0.20 percent.
Structural Reforms
The authorities are fully aware that sustainable economic growth requires further structural
reforms to provide strong financial footing to the pension, healthcare, education and railroad
transportation systems. Based on the recommendations provided by the Fund’s TA mission
in late 2010, the authorities implemented a package of measures ensuring the long-term
financial stability of the Bulgarian pension system and better adequacy of pensions. As an
immediate step, following a decade of decreasing rates, the social contribution rate was
raised by 1.8 pp. The length of service is increased as of 2012, followed by a gradual increase
in the statutory retirement age. These measures, together with structural reforms in the labor
market, aim at a steady increase in economic activity and will neutralize the burden of an
ageing population in the future without jeopardizing the stability of public finances.
The health care reform targets higher efficiency of health care expenditures combined with
measures for improving public health, higher national health security and stabilizing
healthcare system infrastructure. Starting from 2011, an integrated information system is
developed to link in real time the information systems of healthcare institutions and their
contractors. The system will connect existing systems of several institutions with the

4
healthcare service providers and will guarantee timely and accurate exchange of information
among all participants as a basis for regular assessment of the health insurance system,
monitoring and optimal decision making in the sector. Work on developing electronic
registers, electronic prescriptions, and electronic referrals will continue, and already existing
registers will be integrated into a unified information system with some of them publicly
accessible through web-portals. At the next stage, an electronic patients dossier will be
developed and maintained.
The need for fiscal consolidation necessitates additional measures to increase the financial
independence of the education sector, including through attracting private capital, which in
turn will improve the links between the educational system and the labor market. These new
practices in financing the Bulgarian education and pre-school education are defined in detail
in the new Law on Pre-School and School Education, which is to be adopted in 2012. The
implementation of these measures will also enhance the transparency of public expenditures
and its effectiveness through financing the educational system output, will accelerate school
network optimization, and will contribute to broader pupil coverage through linking
financing and the number of students.
The World Bank will provide assistance for institutional reforms in education. The assistance
will be targeted both at improving the quality of the primary and secondary education
through strengthening the schools’ reporting system and improving the system of external
evaluation of the quality of education, and at improving the quality and significance of higher
education through better management in higher schools, stricter control over their
accreditation and linking the government financing to output.
The restructuring of the railroad companies has already started as a prior action for financing
from the World Bank. The plans aim at better cost recovery, competitive tendering for public
services and infrastructure maintenance and abolishment of losses and liquidation of arrears.
The authorities have given high political priority to addressing various problems with the low
rate of EU funds utilization. In 2011 the ambitious goal is to increase annual absorption of
EU funds to the level equal to the total absorption for the period 2007-10. It is expected that
the goal will be comfortably met.

