October 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/306

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

July 15, 2010
June 9, 2010

July 30, 2010
July 15, 2010
2010
January 29, 2001

Lebanon: 2010 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement: Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Lebanon
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2010 Article IV consultation with Lebanon, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2010 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on June 9, 2010, with the officials of Lebanon on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on July 15, 2010. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.



A staff statement of July 29, 2010 updating information on recent developments.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 30, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.



A statement by the Executive Director for Lebanon.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LEBANON
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Ratna Sahay and Thomas Dorsey
July 14, 2010
MAIN ISSUES
Background
Lebanon’s economy has largely escaped the impact of the global crisis and performed remarkably well,
reflecting a more stable political environment and prudent macroeconomic management. Short-term risks
have declined, but there has been little progress in advancing structural reforms and the country’s
underlying macrofinancial vulnerabilities—especially the government debt—remain very high.
Policy challenges
The key challenges facing the authorities are managing the buoyant economy cautiously to avoid
overheating risks, and taking advantage of the positive momentum to address both existing and potential
emerging vulnerabilities, and advance long-delayed reforms that will entrench stability and sustain
medium-term growth.
Key recommendations


Target a primary surplus of at least 2 percent of GDP in 2010 to limit stimulus to the strongly growing
economy. Accommodate within this fiscal envelope higher investments to overcome infrastructure
gaps and proceed in parallel with reforms to address inefficiencies of public utilities.



Take a cautious approach to further policy interest rate reductions to ensure a smooth deceleration
of deposit inflows to a pace that can be more readily absorbed by the economy.



Continue to aim bank supervision and regulation at preventing excessive risk-taking in light of strong
credit growth and rapidly rising real estate prices, paying special attention also to the banking
system’s expansion outside Lebanon.



Pursue a decisive further reduction in the public debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium term, while
allowing space for permanently higher investment and social spending. This requires rationalizing
public expenditures and adopting tax measures.



Implement structural reforms, including modernizing tax administration and public financial
management; creating a sound framework for public-private partnerships; and strengthening the
Banque du Liban’s income position.



Further improve the coverage, quality, and timeliness of economic statistics, as data deficiencies still
hamper surveillance and policy development.

Authorities’ views
The authorities broadly shared the policy recommendations, although they noted that progress on major
structural reforms will require consensus-building.

2

Contents
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

Page

Background .................................................................................................................... 3
The Current State of Lebanon’s Economy ..................................................................... 5
Managing the Buoyant Economy in 2010....................................................................... 7
A. 2010 Budget—Balancing Spending Needs and Stability Goals ......................... 7
B. Managing Monetary Policy in the Face of Large Capital Inflows ........................ 9
C. Tailoring Supervision to an Evolving Banking Sector ....................................... 11
A Medium-Term Roadmap for Continued Stability and Sustained Growth .................. 13
Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................. 17

Boxes
1.
Economic Performance and Policies in Context ............................................................ 4
2.
Lebanon’s Infrastructure Deficit...................................................................................... 8
3.
Real Exchange Rate Assessment ................................................................................ 11
4.
The Regionalization of Lebanese Banks ...................................................................... 12
5.
Government Debt Sustainability Analysis .................................................................... 15
6.
Public Private Partnerships in Lebanon ....................................................................... 16
Tables
1.
Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–15 ...................................................................... 20
2.
Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing, 2008–15
(In billions of Lebanese pounds) .................................................................................. 21
3.
Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing, 2008–15
(In percent of GDP) ...................................................................................................... 22
4.
Government Debt, 2008–15 ......................................................................................... 23
5.
Monetary Survey, 2008–12 .......................................................................................... 24
6.
Balance of Payments, 2008–15 ................................................................................... 25
7.
Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–15, Reform Scenario ......................................... 26
8.
Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing, 2008–15, Reform Scenario
(In percent of GDP) ...................................................................................................... 27
9.
Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators, 2006–10 .......................................... 28
10. Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 2006–10......................................... 29
11. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006–15 .............................................. 30
Figure
1.
Public Debt Sustainability, 2005–15 ............................................................................. 31
Appendices
1.
The Output Gap ........................................................................................................... 32
2.
Interest Rate Transmission .......................................................................................... 33
3.
Tax Policy Options ....................................................................................................... 35

3

1.

BACKGROUND 1

1.
Lebanon’s economic and financial performance has been remarkable in the face of
the global recession. The economy bucked international trends during the global financial
crisis, maintaining strong growth momentum despite the country’s large underlying
vulnerabilities.
2.
This positive outcome reflected domestic and external factors. Confidence
rebounded with the political reconciliation agreement reached in Doha in 2008 and the
successful, though delayed, formation of a new national unity government in late 2009, which
returned the country to relative political stability. Together with a global low-interest rate
environment, this unleashed a sharp acceleration in capital inflows even during the global crisis.
3.
Macroeconomic policies remained prudent during the upswing, but there was little
progress on structural reforms. Buoyant revenues, supported by the reintroduction of fuel
excises, led to an increase in the government’s primary surplus to 3 percent of GDP in 2009,
which—together with strong growth–allowed for a marked reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio. In
addition, the Banque du Liban (BdL) took advantage of the abundant capital inflows to
accumulate international reserves. While macroeconomic outcomes have been broadly
consistent with the frameworks that were drawn up in the context of the 2007 Paris III donor
conference and the two programs supported by the IMF’s Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance
(EPCA), structural reforms fell substantially short of the authorities’ commitments (Box 1).
GDP Growth, Government Debt, and Primary Balance
10
190
8

Real GDP growth
(percent, lhs)

30

Gross International Reserves 1/
(in billions of U.S. dollars)

180

6
4

170 20

2

160

0
-2
-4

150 10
Primary balance
(percent of GDP, lhs)

Government debt
(percent of GDP, rhs)

140

130 0
-6
Apr-07 Oct-07 Apr-08 Oct-08 Apr-09 Oct-09 Apr-10
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes gold.

1

This report is based on discussions held in Beirut during May 27–June 9, 2010. The staff team comprised Messrs. Bauer
(head), Finger, Hesse, Mottu (Resident Representative), Sadikov (all MCD), and Lopez Murphy (FAD). Ms. Choueiri (OED)
joined for some discussions. Staff met with the Minister of Finance, the Governor of the Banque du Liban (BdL), a number of
other members of cabinet and officials of the administration, members of parliament, and representatives of the private sector
and the academia. The mission held a joint press conference with the authorities and issued a concluding statement.

4

Box 1. Economic Performance and Policies in Context
Lebanon’s macroeconomic performance has been stronger than anticipated at the time of the
Paris III conference and the first program supported by Emergency Post Crisis Assistance (EPCA I)
in early 2007. Average real GDP growth during 2007–09 was 8.5 percent, markedly higher than the
3 percent projected under Paris III/EPCA I. Strong growth, together with an increase in the primary fiscal
balance broadly in line with expectations, allowed for a decline in the government’s debt-to-GDP ratio to
148 percent by end-2009. While this decline was somewhat less than projected under Paris III/EPCA I, the
latter assumed resources from privatization of the mobile phone carriers, which did not materialize. At the
same time, strong capital inflows and the ongoing dedollarization of deposits allowed for a much larger
than anticipated build-up of international reserves.

10
8

Real GDP
(Annual Percent Change)

4.0

Actual

Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percent of GDP)

3.0
Actual

6
2.0
4
Paris III /
EPCA I

2

1.0

Paris III /
EPCA I

0
0.0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Government Debt
Gross International Reserves
(In percent of GDP)
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
190
30
180
170

Actual

Paris III /
EPCA I

25

Actual

20

160

15

150

10

140

5

130
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Paris III /
EPCA I

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

Progress toward the Paris III structural reform objectives has been much more limited. Price stability
was maintained, gasoline excises were restored, and increases in capital expenditures and the tax on
interest income are part of the draft 2010 budget. The authorities are also working to introduce a more
uniform income tax, improve debt management and the budget process, and partially privatize the air
carrier MEA. Some progress has also been made in capital market, business environment, and social
sector reforms. However, the implementation of other commitments has made little headway, including
raising the VAT rate; reforming the electricity sector; privatizing the mobile phone carriers; reducing the
wage bill as percent of GDP; eliminating extrabudgetary funds (Fund for the Displaced and Council of the
South); and reforming the pension system.
Macroeconomic policy since the last Article IV Consultations has been broadly in line with the
staff’s advice. The authorities implemented the 2009 budget cautiously and saved the revenue
overperformance, which led to a much higher than budgeted primary surplus and a marked decline in the
government’s debt-to-GDP ratio. Similarly, the authorities gradually reduced interest rates—although at
times somewhat slower than suggested by staff—with a view to moderating the pace of deposit inflows
once it became apparent that the global crisis was virtually not affecting Lebanon and domestic political
near-term risks abated.

5
4.
While some headway has been made in reducing short-term risks, large
underlying vulnerabilities remain and new vulnerabilities could emerge in the future.
Domestic stability rests on the fragile political system that is split along confessional lines, and
the country lies at the crossroads of regional tensions. The government’s debt, at 148 percent of
GDP, still remains among the highest in the world, and almost half of it is denominated in foreign
currency. The large banking system is highly exposed to the sovereign, and dependent on
short-term deposit inflows from nonresidents. Bank lending is to a large extent dollarized, which
creates exposure to unhedged borrowers. In addition, unless carefully managed, new
vulnerabilities could emerge in the future from rapidly rising real estate prices, plans to develop
public private partnerships (PPPs), or the ongoing regionalization of local banks.

2.

THE CURRENT STATE OF LEBANON’S ECONOMY

5.
The expansion of the economy continues at a fast pace. Real GDP rose 9 percent in
2009 backed by a confidence rebound and large capital inflows, which fueled activity in the
construction, tourism, commerce, and financial services sectors. The output gap has
substantially narrowed or even closed and momentum carried into 2010, with growth now
expected to reach at least 8 percent (Appendix 1). Inflation has risen since the fall of 2009,
driven partly by energy prices. Real estate prices have also increased at a rapid pace. In view of
the Lebanese pound’s peg to the U.S. dollar, the weak euro should help keep inflation in check
in the coming months provided that there is no further build-up of price pressures in the
non-tradable sector, which could be a risk if the economy accelerates further.
Cyclical Indicators
26

95
85

Coincident indicator of economic activity
(y-o-y percent change, rhs)

22

75

18

65

14

55

10

45
Consumer
confidence (lhs)

35
25
May-08

Nov-08

May-09

Nov-09

6

2
May-10

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Jan-09

Contribution to Headline Inflation
(Y-o-y, in percent)
Food and non-alcoholic
beverages
Transportation and
communication
Others

Apr-09

Jul-09

Oct-09

Jan-10

Apr-10

Sources: Lebanese authorities; Byblos Bank Group; and staff estimates and projections.

6.
The current account deficit is set to widen in 2010, mainly reflecting
domestic-demand driven growth. The current account deficit remained stable in 2009, as
rebounding tourism inflows and lower prices for energy imports helped offset the effects of rising
domestic demand. The current account will likely deteriorate this year as imports receive an
additional boost from buoyant domestic demand and a partial rebound of oil prices.
7.
Capital inflows remain robust despite some moderation in recent months.
Non-resident inflows surged last year as political and security risks declined and the authorities
kept domestic interest rates high while global rates dropped. As a result, commercial bank
deposits grew by more than 23 percent in 2009 and deposit dollarization declined. This allowed
the BdL to increase international reserves to over $29 billion, while sterilizing much of the impact
on the domestic money supply through the issuance of CDs. Deposit inflows moderated in the

6
first half of 2010, following a series of interest rate cuts, but remain healthy overall at an
annualized growth rate of about 11 percent. Sovereign and CDS spreads have increased
somewhat in recent weeks, broadly in line with emerging market averages.

80

Deposit Growth and Dollarization

30

Deposit
growth (12wk. mov.
avg., ann.,
rhs)

75

Sovereign Spreads

1400

Lehman

1200
20

70

EMBIG
Lebanon

1000
800

65

Lebanon CDS

0
60
Jun-07 Dec-07 Jun-08 Dec-08 Jun-09 Dec-09 Jun-10

EMBIG
Composite

1200
800
600

400
200

Deposit dollarization (in percent, lhs)

1400
1000

600
10

Dubai Greece
World

400
200

EM CDX

0
1/1/08

0
10/23/08

8/15/09

6/7/10

Sources: Lebanese authorities; Bloomberg; and staff estimates and projections.

8.
The banking system has remained sound, but credit growth has picked up recently
as banks are seeking to reverse falling interest margins. Lebanon’s banks have weathered
the global crisis well, thanks to relatively conservative funding and asset structures, which reflect
prudent banking regulation and supervision. Supported by the strong economy, the banking
system remains profitable and well-capitalized, highly liquid, and exhibits low and still falling NPL
ratios. Exposure to Dubai was very limited, and is virtually non-existent with regards to Southern
Europe. However, falling interest rates are putting pressure on bank profits, challenging the
traditional business model that relied on intermediation of private deposits to the government
and the BdL. Banks are responding by seeking new growth opportunities outside of Lebanon
and expanding domestic credit to the private sector, which has accelerated to 21 percent y-o-y
growth in April.

26
22

Private Sector Credit Growth
(In percent)
Lending rate
in LL (rhs)

18

Credit to
private
sector (y-o-y)
(lhs)

Lebanon: Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators, 2007–10

11
10
9

14
10

8
Lending rate
in USD (rhs)

Dec-07 Dec-08 Dec-09 Mar-10

12

7

6
6
Apr-07 Oct-07 Apr-08 Oct-08 Apr-09 Oct-09 Apr-10

Capital adequacy ratio 1/
Net problem loans/net total loans 2/
Provisions against problem loans/problem
Claims on the sovereign/total assets
Average return on assets (post tax)
Average return on equity (post tax)
Net liquid assets/short-term liabilities

12.5
4.7
56.9
50.8
1.0
12.1
47.9

12.1
3.1
61.3
54.8
1.1
13.8
50.1

12.4
2.3
64.4
55.9
1.1
14.4
54.2

…
2.1
63.4
56.0
1.0
14.5
52.1

Sources: Banque du Liban, Banking Control Commission and staff estimates.
1/ Basel II ratio.
2/ Net of provisions against problem loans.

9.
Near-term risks to the economic outlook are mainly linked to the political and
regional security situation. The risk of a relapse by opposing party blocks into political
deadlock or spillovers from a sudden spike in regional tensions remains latent, and exposes
Lebanon to the possibility of a sudden negative confidence shock. While there has been little
fallout from Greece so far, an adverse shift in global market sentiment could lead to a repricing of
sovereign risk, which would hurt the debt dynamics and could put pressure on international
reserves. To some extent, this risk is mitigated by Lebanon’s limited exposure to external
government debt markets and its loyal depositor base. However, future shocks could be different
in nature and expose vulnerabilities more strongly than past crises.

7
10.
Against this broadly positive backdrop, economic policy still faces a number of
challenges.


In the near term, the key issue is to manage the buoyant economy cautiously,
avoiding overheating risks, such as excessive pressures on non-tradable prices
and the external current account. This requires, in the first place, a prudent fiscal
policy stance. In addition, monetary and prudential policies have to be adapted to the
post-global crisis environment to temper deposit inflows and avoid potential risks that
could emerge in the future if property prices continued to rise rapidly, or from the regional
expansion of local banks.



The main medium-term challenges are to address the country’s sizeable remaining
macrofinancial vulnerabilities and implement growth-enhancing structural
reforms. The key issue here is to avoid complacency and instead take advantage of the
positive momentum to achieve debt reduction and re-launch long-delayed structural
reforms, which could jointly help entrench stability and maintain high and sustainable
rates of growth.

3.

MANAGING THE BUOYANT ECONOMY IN 2010

11.
The authorities’ short-term policy focus is increasingly shifting from bolstering the
economy in the face of a global recession toward managing its rapid expansion. Fiscal
policy seeks to reconcile plans for a substantial increase in infrastructure investments with the
need to safeguard macroeconomic stability and debt reduction. The challenge for monetary
policy, in turn, is to slow deposit inflows to a pace that can be absorbed without excessive credit
growth or international reserves accumulation and associated sterilization costs. Finally, banking
sector regulation and supervision is increasingly focusing on potential vulnerabilities emanating
from high credit growth, sharply rising real estate prices, and the regionalization of domestic
banks.

A. 2010 Budget—Balancing Spending Needs and Stability Goals
12.
The authorities’ draft 2010 budget implies a substantial fiscal relaxation to
accommodate higher capital expenditures. The draft budget, which was approved by cabinet
in mid-June following extended deliberations and is currently under discussion in parliament,
envisages a 2.4 percent of GDP (200 percent nominal) increase in capital spending, including
substantial investments in electricity generation, which has fallen significantly behind demand
(Box 2). Revenue measures amount to 0.8 percent of GDP and include a 2 percentage point
increase in the interest income tax, an asset revaluation tax, and higher registration fees for
high-end properties. A much-discussed VAT hike was dropped for lack of political support. Full
implementation of the budget would imply a fall in the primary surplus from 3 percent of GDP in
2009 to 0.5 percent of GDP this year, but would still allow a further moderate decline in the
government debt-to-GDP ratio given strong economic growth.
13.
The primary surplus in 2010 may be higher than budgeted. The authorities and staff
believe that the actual primary surplus could reach about 1.5 percent of GDP because of the
delays in approving the budget, normal lags in the execution of public investment, and favorable
revenue trends.

8
14.
Staff noted that from a cyclical perspective there was little need for a fiscal
impulse and encouraged the authorities to aim for a higher primary surplus. The currency
peg, which limits room for countercyclical monetary policy, places the onus for short-term
demand management on fiscal policy (supported by prudential measures). Moreover, achieving
a higher primary surplus would also contribute to faster debt reduction. Staff suggested a primary
surplus target of at least 2 percent of GDP for 2010, which could be attained by cautiously
executing current spending and saving any revenue overperformance. Planned investments to
address pressing infrastructure bottlenecks could be accommodated within this fiscal envelope,
although related structural reforms should proceed in parallel to ensure that these investments
correct rather than reinforce existing deficiencies. For example, staff cautioned that in the
electricity sector a substantial increase in investment without a simultaneous movement toward
cost recovery could lead to additional losses and subsidies from the budget.

Box 2. Lebanon’s Infrastructure Deficit
Public investment in Lebanon is low by international and historical standards, and there are
severe infrastructure bottlenecks. Capital spending averaged only 2.5 percent of GDP during 2003–08,
and reached a low of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2009. Low investment levels have contributed to generating
severe infrastructure gaps, mainly in electricity, telecommunications, water, and the road network,
adversely affecting the medium-term growth potential.
Average Public Investment, 2003-08
(In percent of GDP)

15

7.6

Yemen

9.7

UAE

7.4

Jordan

6.7

7.4

Saudi Arabia

4.1

6.5

Bahrain

3.9

6.1

Tunisia

Morocco

3.4

Egypt

2.8

Pakistan

2.5

Lebanon

3

Kuwait

6

Sudan

9

10.3 10.8

Iran

12

11.5 11.7

12.9

8.3

0
Oman

Algeria

Djibouti

Syria

Qatar

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff calculations and projections.

Many infrastructure sectors also suffer from deficiencies in their regulatory frameworks and poor
governance and inefficiencies of public utilities. The electricity sector requires high budgetary
transfers, and Electricité du Liban (EdL) is inefficient in its structure and operations. Partly due to a lack of
competition, Lebanon lags behind its neighbors in telecommunications, in quality, range of services
offered, and competitiveness of pricing.

15.
The financing outlook for the government remains favorable and should allow
further progress toward achieving a safer debt structure. There was agreement that—
barring a major shock—the government’s remaining financing needs for 2010 could be covered
by the market, as banks remain very liquid despite the recent slowdown in deposit growth.
Following the rollover of $1.2 billion in 10-year Eurobonds in March, the government does not
face major foreign currency maturities until November–December ($1.4 billion). Staff seconded
the authorities’ intentions to use the opportunity to gradually lengthen the maturity profile and
lower the foreign currency share of government debt. The latter could be achieved by continuing
to fund in local currency some of the government’s foreign currency debt service. However, such
a strategy should be closely coordinated with the BdL and implemented with a view to safeguard
an adequate level of international reserves. Staff also highlighted the desirability of gradually

9

increasing the share of non-bank funding, and welcomed the authorities’ intention to mobilize
concessional loans pledged at past donor conferences.
Government FX Debt Service
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1000

Lebanon: Gross Financing Requirement
Jul-Dec 2010
A. Primary Balance (LL bn)

Interest

600

250

B. Interest (LL bn)
On LL debt
On FX debt

800

Principal
400
200
0
Jul-10 Aug-10 Sep-10 Oct-10 Nov-10 Dec-10
Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff calculations and projections.

3172
2100
1072

C. Amortization (LL bn)
On LL debt
On FX debt

10536
8397
2139

Gross Financing Need = B+C-A
In LL bn
In US$ bn
Percent of GDP

13458
8.9
22.8

Memorandum Item:
GDP (LL bn)

59018

Sources: Banque du Liban; and staff estimates.

Lebanon: Foreign Assistance to Government
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2007
Act.

2008
Act.

2009
Act.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

Total
Grants
Loans

773
348
425

678
257
421

890
139
751

775
144
631

823
43
780

Memorandum item:
Paris III disbursements
Grants
Loans

572
147
425

382
144
237

660
102
558

659
121
538

700
32
667

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

B. Managing Monetary Policy in the Face of Large Capital Inflows
16.
After two years of substantial accumulation, international reserves have reached
adequate levels. The authorities noted and staff agreed that Lebanon’s fiscal and financial
vulnerabilities and its exposure to potential political shocks provided a justification for the
accumulated foreign exchange buffer. In staff’s view, reserves now cover a comfortable share of
broad money and short-term debt, are large enough to withstand plausible Lebanon-specific
shock scenarios, and have reached optimal levels according to an applied insurance model. At
the same time, self-insurance has come at a cost, as the BdL had to sterilize reserves purchases,

10
mainly through the issuance of high-yielding LL CDs.2 The resulting interest cost weighs significantly
on the BdL’s net income position.
17.
With comfortable reserves in view
of the staff, monetary policy has shifted
focus to moderating deposit inflows. Policy
interest rates have been allowed to drop
markedly (by more than 400 bps since
mid-2008 on 5-year T-bills/BdL CDs, of which
70bps in April and May of 2010 alone).
However, the decline in deposit rates has
been more gradual and modest, reflecting
imperfect monetary transmission with variable
lags (Appendix 2). Deposit rates have
recently started to fall more rapidly, and given
the recent erosion of bank interest margins,
further declines are likely in the pipeline.

Interest Rates
(In Percent)

14
12

5-yr
Securities
rate 1/

Average
deposit rate
in LL

10
8

Average
deposit rate
in USD

6
4

2
Apr-07 Oct-07 Apr-08 Oct-08 Apr-09 Oct-09 Apr-10
Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ 5-yr BdL CD rate until June, 2009. 5-yr T-bill rate thereafter.

18.
A pause in policy interest rate reductions may be warranted to ensure a smooth
adjustment process. There was broad agreement that care should be taken not to overshoot
on reducing policy rates, as risks were judged to be asymmetric. The risk of a possible drying up
of inflows because of lags in the response of market interest rates to past monetary policy
actions was believed to be costlier than the risk of temporarily accumulating more reserves than
optimal. Cautious interest policy would also reduce the risk of having to backpedal if world
interest rates and/or emerging market risk premia were to rise, for example in the context of the
Southern European crisis. Given the importance of guiding market expectation in the adjustment
process, staff encouraged the BdL to clearly communicate its monetary policy objectives to the
public.
19.
The exchange rate peg provides a strong
nominal anchor and remains the lynchpin of
financial stability.3 Maintenance of the peg is
essential in light of the government’s high debt and
debt service obligations in foreign currency, and the
substantial currency mismatches of corporations and
households, owing to widespread loan dollarization.
Staff encouraged the authorities to work towards
reducing these vulnerabilities. The authorities agreed
with staff’s assessment that, although the recent
strength of the U.S. dollar has led to some real
appreciation of the Lebanese pound, the real effective
exchange rate remains broadly in line with
fundamentals (Box 3).

CPI-Based Real Exchange Rate Developments
(Index, 1995=100; January 1995-April 2010)
120

120
Effective
price ratio
(rhs)

100

100

NEER

80

80
REER

60
60
Jan-95 Jul-97 Jan-00 Jul-02 Jan-05 Jul-07 Jan-10
Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff calculations.
Note: A higher value indicates a more appreciated
exchange rate.

2

From August 2009 to March 2010, the Ministry of Finance also built cash balances at the BdL for pre-financing purposes,
using primarily 3- and 5-year government T-bills. These balances reduced the sterilization needs of the BdL.
3

Under the IMF’s exchange rate arrangement classification system, Lebanon falls under the category “stabilized arrangement”
since its de facto peg has not been formally announced.

11

Box 3. Real Exchange Rate Assessment
Lebanon’s exchange rate appears broadly in line with its fundamentals. After several years of
decline in line with a weakening U.S. dollar, the real effective exchange rate (REER) has risen
somewhat since mid-2008. The recent increase in the real exchange rate reflects both a strengthening of
the U.S. dollar and sustained domestic inflation.
Lebanon’s strong export performance
suggests that the country does not face major
competitiveness problems. Both goods and
services export volumes are estimated to have
grown by close to 15 percent on average over the
past five years (2005-09), and by 6 percent on
average over the last twenty years despite a
major appreciation of the U.S. dollar and hence
the Lebanese pound during the 1990s. Among
services exports, tourism, which accounts for one
third of exports, has been particularly dynamic in
recent years, as reflected—for example—in
substantially higher tourist arrival numbers.

Exports of Goods and Services, 2000-2009
(Constant prices of 2005, in billions of U.S. dollars)
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Exports of goods & services
Export of services
Exports of goods

Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff calculations.

The application of the three methodologies proposed by the IMF’s Consultative Group on
Exchange Rate Issues (CGER) does not yield evidence of a marked exchange rate misalignment.
The macroeconomic balance and the external sustainability approaches point to a somewhat overvalued
exchange rate (between 3 and 9 percent), while the equilibrium real exchange rate approach suggests a
modest undervaluation (by up
Lebanon: Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation Estimates Using CGER Approaches 1/
to 10 percent). The
NEAP 1 - IFS 2/
NEAP 2 - BIS 3/
differences between the
1. Macrobalance approach 4/
results likely reflect
Current account norm (in percent of GDP)
-6.8
-6.2
methodological differences
Underlying
Steady state
Underlying
Steady state
and limited data availability, as
Current account (in percent of GDP)
-8.0
-9.9
-8.0
-9.9
some variables commonly
Overvaluation (in percent)
2.8
7.4
4.3
8.8
used for equilibrium exchange
2. External sustainability approach
rate estimations are not
Overvaluation (in percent)
4.0
9.1
3. Equilibrium real exchange rate approach overvaluation 5/
Min
Max
available for Lebanon. Taking
Overvaluation (in percent)
-10.4
-0.2
into account the individual
1/ Using CGER parameters and a current account elasticity of 0.4.
methodologies’ strengths and
1/ Net external asset position (NEAP) estimate based on International Financial Statistics data.
weaknesses in the Lebanon
3/ Net external asset position (NEAP) estimate based on Bank for International Settlements data.
context, all three
4/ For each parametrization, compares the norms with a) underlying 2009 current account stripped of temporary factors
and b) steady state (2015) current account.
methodologies should be
5/ Range of estimates obtained using different model specifications.
given about equal weight in
the overall assessment.

C. Tailoring Supervision to an Evolving Banking Sector
20.
The authorities are focusing bank regulation and supervision on preventing
excessive risk taking. For example, they limited the loan-to-value ratio for most real estate
loans to 60 percent. Staff agreed that the BdL and the Banking Control Commission (BCC)
should remain vigilant to the potential risks of weakening credit standards, increasing leverage in
specific sectors, and deteriorating asset quality. Staff noted that, despite conservative prudential
regulation on leverage and limited bank exposure to the real estate sector, care should be taken
that the recent surge in housing prices and accelerating credit growth do not feed off each other
to produce a real estate bubble. Moreover, prudential regulation may need to support monetary
and fiscal policies in dealing with the booming economy. In particular, if credit growth
accelerates further, the authorities should consider increasing effective reserve requirements,

12
including by phasing out existing exemptions that were created to stimulate lending in domestic
currency. Looking forward, the BdL and BCC could also consider the merits of introducing
countercyclical prudential regulation.
21.
The regional expansion of Lebanese banks justifies the BCC’s heightened focus
on effective cross-border supervision. Current supervisory activities are broadly in line with
good practices and could be further enhanced through continued efforts to deepen de facto
cooperation and information sharing with host country supervisors, and greater focus on
conducting stress testing and scenario analyses (Box 4).
22.
Further progress is needed in the areas of anti-money laundering and combating
the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). The authorities are committed to conform their
AML/CFT framework to the Financial Action Task Force’s 40+9 Recommendations. The recent
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force Mutual Evaluation Report recognized
significant progress accomplished by the authorities in several areas, including the performance
of the Financial Intelligence Unit, while noting that the framework needs further strengthening in
other areas, in particular the criminalization of money laundering and the financing of terrorism,
and the reinforcement of the AML/CFT supervisory system.

Box 4. The Regionalization of Lebanese Banks
Lebanese banks have substantially increased cross-border activities in recent years by opening
affiliates abroad and increasing non-resident lending from their headquarters in Lebanon. There
are currently more than 50 affiliates (branches, subsidiaries and
Lebanese Banks Abroad 1/
representative offices) of Lebanese banks operating in about
Total assets Number of
20 countries. Total assets of foreign affiliates amount roughly to
(in
US$ billions)
affiliates
$25 billion, or 19 percent of the domestic banking sector. Loans to
Syria
7.0
9
non-residents booked by parent banks have tripled since 2006,
France
4.2
4
reaching 16 percent of private sector credit.
The foreign expansion has been motivated by the limited
growth potential of the domestic credit market and untapped
opportunities in countries with growing banking sectors.
Lebanese banks have traditionally been active in Europe, but more
recently they have primarily targeted countries in North Africa and
the Middle East with business models that adapt to host country
conditions. For example, in Syria, Egypt, and Jordan banks engage
in universal banking, while Cyprus is used as a gateway for
offshore services. In Europe, banks concentrate on trade finance
and private banking, while in Africa, they cater largely to the
Lebanese diaspora.

Egypt
Cyprus
Jordan
Switzerland
Belgium
Turkey
Sudan
United Kingdom

3.7
2.2
1.9
1.2
0.9
0.8
0.6
0.4

3
10
3
2
1
1
2
1

Sources: Fund staff estimates based
on preliminary data from authorities.
1/ Top 10 countries by the total
assets of affiiliates.

The growing regionalization of banks calls for effective
regulation and cross-border supervision, which the Banque du Liban and the BCC are
undertaking. The authorities have implemented a number of measures to strengthen the oversight of
Lebanese affiliates abroad. Any equity investment by a Lebanese bank abroad requires prior approval
from the BCC. Foreign affiliates are required to submit monthly financial statements and audit reports to
their parent banks and the BCC, and parent banks must set up a special committee to oversee their
foreign affiliates. To limit the foreign exposure, total net financing from a parent bank to its affiliates
cannot exceed 25 percent of equity, while non-resident lending is subject to a ceiling that depends on the
sovereign rating of borrower’s country. The BCC has also signed memoranda of understanding with most
host country supervisors, which establish procedures for information exchange and off- and on-site
inspections.

13

4.

A MEDIUM-TERM ROADMAP FOR CONTINUED STABILITY
AND SUSTAINED GROWTH

23.
The authorities and staff agreed that lowering the government debt-to-GDP ratio
remains the top medium-term priority to reduce Lebanon’s macro-financial vulnerabilities.
Under the staff’s baseline no-policy change scenario, the debt-to-GDP ratio would remain above
135 percent throughout the medium term and could become explosive if the economy suffers a
negative shock and policies are not strengthened (Box 5). Large gross financing requirements
also carry substantial rollover risks, and the high interest burden (45 percent of revenues)
crowds out productive public spending, limiting the economy’s growth potential. Against this
backdrop, the authorities reiterated their commitment to pursue an ambitious reduction of the
public debt over the medium term.
24.
The baseline scenario would imply a further temporary relaxation of the fiscal
primary balance in 2011. Given the delays in the approval of the 2010 budget and spending
lags, the increase in public investment set in motion in the 2010 draft budget would be executed
to a significant extent in 2011. With unchanged policies, this would lead to a further decline in the
primary surplus next year to about 0.5 percent of GDP, before returning to around 1.5 percent of
GDP in 2012-15. With this, the debt-GDP ratio would stabilize at around 137 percent of GDP
over the medium-term.
25.
Staff also presented a reform scenario that envisages sizeable fiscal consolidation
and the implementation of long-delayed structural reforms. The scenario centers on
increasing the government’s primary surplus to 5 percent of GDP by 2015, while creating fiscal
space to maintain a permanently higher level of public investment and social spending to
broaden the social safety net (Tables 7 and 8; and Box 5). The additional adjustment would
boost confidence, help reduce interest rates, and raise the medium-term growth potential. Under
these assumptions, the government debt-to-GDP ratio could decline by 25–30 percentage points
by 2015.

6

Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percent of GDP)

180

Government Debt
(Percent of GDP)

5
4

160

Reform
scenario

3
2
1

Baseline

140

Baseline

120

Reform
scenario

100
0
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Sources: Lebanese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

14
26.
Fiscal space would need to be created through a combination of expenditure
rationalization and tax measures.


On the spending side, staff argued for a rationalization of current expenditures, stressing
in particular that there is room for shifting the high and poorly targeted budget transfers
to EdL (4.2 percent of GDP in 2009) to more productive uses. This requires reforms to
EdL’s administration to achieve efficiency gains and a decisive move in the tariff
structure toward cost recovery. The authorities agreed on the importance of reforming
the electricity sector, noting that a strategy to this effect has been developed with support
from the World Bank and was recently approved by cabinet. They also noted that budget
subsidies to EdL had been 1 percent of GDP lower during the first quarter of 2010 than in
the first quarter of 2009, reflecting lower fuel costs but also some improvements in the
collection of electricity bills.



On the revenue side, staff presented a menu of options to generate additional revenues
of about 3 percent of GDP over five years. The final revenue package should take equity
and efficiency considerations into account and focus on increasing uniformity,
broadening tax bases, and possibly raising some tax rates that are moderate by
international standards (Appendix 3). Potential measures encompass reforming the
income tax, including to cover capital gains for individuals; broadening the VAT base by
eliminating exemptions; raising excises on alcohols; and protecting the real value of
excise taxes through indexation. In addition, both the VAT and the corporate income tax
rates are comparatively low and offer potential for a gradual increase. The authorities
intend to submit later this year a new income tax law to parliament that goes in the
recommended direction. They will also consider further tax reforms for the 2011 budget,
although this would require consensus-building.

27.
Telecom privatization could enhance the economy’s growth potential while
helping to reduce the public debt. The authorities ruled out privatizations in the very short
term, but considered that the sale of the two public mobile phone providers could be envisaged
at a later stage. The telecom sector is inefficient in infrastructure investment and pricing, and
privatization could be one route towards unlocking the sector’s large growth potential.

15

Box 5. Government Debt Sustainability Analysis
Debt level and structure. Lebanon’s sovereign gross debt amounted to LL 77 trillion (US$51 billion)
as of end-2009. This was equal to 148 percent of GDP, 139 percent of GNDI, and 53 percent of
commercial bank assets. Domestic currency debt accounted for 58 percent of total government debt
and carried an average maturity of 1.6 years. Foreign currency debt made up for the remaining
42 percent of the government debt and had a higher average maturity of 4.6 years. The government
debt is mainly held by commercial banks (58 percent), the BdL (15 percent), and other government
institutions (8 percent).
Baseline scenario. Under the baseline (“no policy-change”) scenario, we assume that the
medium-term primary balance (including grants) of the government is kept constant at 1.5 percent of
GDP. Real growth would slow to a potential growth rate of around 4 percent, and Lebanese interest
rates would increase over time in line with projected world interest rates. Under this scenario, the
debt-to-GDP ratio would remain roughly unchanged from its 2010 level of nearly 140 percent of GDP,
as the debt-reducing effects of the primary surpluses and economic growth would be offset by high
interest payments resulting from the large debt stock (Table 11 and Figure 1, panel 1).
Shocks. The risks to this outlook would be substantial. Higher interest rates, lower economic
growth, and fiscal shocks could reverse the downward trend for the debt-to-GDP ratio observed during
2006–10:
 A permanent increase in the real interest rate of 230 basis points (one-half standard deviation from
its past distribution) relative to the baseline would lead to an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio to
158 percent by 2015 (Figure 1, panel 2).
 A permanent decrease in real GDP growth of 1.7 percentage point (one-half standard deviation
from its past distribution) relative to the baseline would raise the debt to 161 percent of GDP
(Figure 1, panel 3).
 A combination of the former two shocks would lead to an increase in the debt to 183 percent of
GDP (Figure 1, panel 4).
 A permanent decrease in primary balance of 1.6 percent of GDP (one-half standard deviation from
its past distribution) relative to the 2000–09 average would lift the debt to 150 percent of GDP
(Figure 1, panel 5).
Reform scenario. Fiscal consolidation, higher investment in social and physical infrastructure,
and structural reforms to strengthen economic institutions would lower interest rates and raise
medium-term growth. Telecom privatization could also contribute to lowering the debt. Under such a
scenario, debt could decline to below 110 percent by 2015 (Figure 1, panel 6).

28.
The authorities are planning to develop public-private partnerships (PPPs) as an
alternative avenue to involve the private sector in addressing the country’s infrastructure
gaps. Staff agreed that PPPs can offer better value for money than the public provision of
infrastructure services, but noted that they may also generate important fiscal liabilities. A
number of preconditions should therefore be met before embarking on a PPP program, such as
a legal framework that ensures adequate risk transfer to the private sector, prescribes a clear
process for the evaluation and approval of PPPs, and establishes a “gatekeeper role” for the
Ministry of Finance to assess and manage fiscal risks. Other elements of a sound PPP
framework involve competitive bidding procedures, incentive-based regulation, capacity-building
at the government level, and proper accounting and reporting of fiscal implications (Box 6). The
authorities are currently in the process of strengthening an earlier draft framework law for PPPs,
which could be re-submitted to parliament during the summer.

16

Box 6. Public Private Partnerships in Lebanon
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) are mechanisms for the provision and operation of
infrastructure assets and services, and represent an alternative to traditional public procurement
or privatization. The main advantage of PPPs is the potential for higher quality services at lower costs.
The main risks with PPPs are related to unforeseen fiscal contingencies.
The international experience with PPPs has been mixed and several preconditions should be in
place to maximize the chances of success. While there is evidence that PPPs have contributed to
efficiency gains, particularly in the United Kingdom where they have been used since the 1990s, there is
also evidence to the contrary. The country experiences suggest that five preconditions should be in
place for PPPs to be successful and contain fiscal risks. First, a sound institutional framework covering
all major aspects of the PPP process and conducive to private participation. Second, a government and
a public administration with sufficient technical expertise to handle a PPP program, including the
capacity to evaluate and select among projects. Third, the allocation of PPP contracts based on
competitive bidding, and reliance on incentive-based regulation. Fourth, an adequate risk transfer to the
private sector. And fifth, proper accounting and reporting of the fiscal implications of PPPs. To reduce
fiscal risks, the Ministry of Finance should be given a strong role in the process and set up a specialized
PPP unit to screen and evaluate potential projects. This unit should have the authority to approve or
reject feasibility studies, tender documents, preferred bidders, and PPP contracts.
PPPs could be a valuable alternative to traditional public procurement of infrastructure in
Lebanon, but should only be pursued if they provide efficiency gains and limit fiscal risks
and contingent liabilities. The latter is particularly important in Lebanon, given the country’s high
debt-to-GDP ratio. To ensure positive outcomes, the authorities will need to refine the existing PPPs
draft law to include comprehensive legal provisions, investment project evaluation and selection,
accounting and reporting procedures, and a strong role for the Ministry of Finance before potential
projects are considered.

29.
Fiscal institutions should be strengthened to support the medium-term strategy.
Staff argued that there is scope to modernize tax administration to further improve compliance
and avoid the perception that taxpayers are affected unevenly by any new tax measures.
Synergies in tax collection could be realized from integrating the VAT and income tax
administrations, strengthening the large taxpayers unit, and introducing electronic filing of tax
returns. In addition, amnesties on fines and penalty interest for tax arrears should be
discontinued. The introduction of the planned more uniform income tax law would constitute a
simplification of existing procedures, easing the administrative burden on tax payers and the tax
administration. On the public financial management side, staff welcomed the provision in the
draft 2010 budget to cast future budgets in a multi-year framework, and encouraged the
authorities to reenergize efforts to broaden the coverage of the budget, introduce a Treasury
Single Account, and strengthen the treasury’s capacity. The authorities are gradually enhancing
the debt management capacity at the Ministry of Finance, including by preparing a decree to
operationalize the debt management unit, which is welcome.
30.
The BdL’s balance sheet should be strengthened. The management of past crises
and large sterilization operations in the last two years have substantially weakened the BdL’s net
income position. Lower interest rates and a much slower pace of reserve accumulation are
helping to ease the drain of the sterilization operations on the BdL’s finances. In addition, the

17
BdL should prepare a strategy for strengthening its income position. In this context, staff argued
that phasing out the exemptions from reserve requirements would be beneficial. Privatization of
the non-financial assets, including the planned partial sale of the national air carrier MEA and the
ongoing divestment of the real estate portfolio, would also help improve the BdL’s financial
balance.
31.
Further efforts are required to improve the statistical system, including its
coverage, quality, and timeliness. Staff called on the authorities to address important
remaining statistical gaps, in particular improving national accounts and balance of payments
statistics, as well as expanding the coverage of fiscal statistics to encompass the various
extrabudgetary entities. In addition, the development of regular and timely wage, employment,
and real estate statistics would allow for enhanced economic monitoring and policy development
(see the Informational Annex).

5.

STAFF APPRAISAL

32.
Lebanon’s economy has performed remarkably well, bucking international trends
in the face of the global crisis. Growth has been fueled by regained political stability and
continued capital inflows, while inflation has remained under control so far.
33.
The authorities are to be commended for pursuing prudent macroeconomic
policies, though structural reforms have remained largely stalled. The government took
advantage of the favorable environment to increase the primary surplus in 2009, which
contributed to a further reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio, while the BdL used the opportunity
provided by abundant capital inflows to bolster its international reserves. However, little progress
has been made toward strengthening economic institutions and addressing other structural
weaknesses.
34.
Short-term risks have declined, but Lebanon’s underlying vulnerabilities remain
high and new ones could emerge. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is still among the highest in
the world and government financing and financial sector stability are reliant on continued inflows
of short-term non-resident deposits. In this environment confidence depends crucially on
continued political stability and the absence of regional tensions.Additional vulnerabilities could
emerge, for example from rapidly rising real estate prices, potential fiscal contingencies from
planned PPPs, or the ongoing internationalization of local banks, unless these processes are
carefully managed.
35.
Thus, while significant progress has been made, the Lebanese authorities
continue to face a number of policy challenges. In the near-term, a key issue is to manage
the buoyant economy cautiously to prevent overheating. In addition, policies should be proactive
to prevent the build-up of new vulnerabilities. Over the medium term, the main challenges are to
decisively reduce the high government debt and address emerging structural bottlenecks. While
Lebanon’s economy has been remarkably resilient to shocks in the past, it will be important to
avoid complacency and act on these fronts, as future crises could be very different in nature and
expose vulnerabilities more strongly than in the past.

18
36.
The fiscal expansion in 2010 should be limited in light of the fast-growing
economy. Staff believes that a higher-than-budgeted primary surplus of at least 2 percent of
GDP this year is both appropriate and achievable, and would leave enough room for a
substantial increase in capital expenditures. Higher public investment is important to address
growing infrastructure gaps, but must be accompanied in parallel by reforms to improve the
efficiency and cost recovery of public utilities, particularly the electricity sector.
37.
Monetary policy has rightly focused on moderating deposit inflows as
international reserves have reached adequate levels, but a pause in policy interest rate
reductions may now be warranted. The authorities have reduced policy interest rates
substantially and the pace of deposit growth has slowed to a level that can be more readily
absorbed by the economy. Given the imperfect monetary transmission mechanism with
uncertain lags in Lebanon, staff suggests a cautious approach to further policy rate reductions.
With interest rate policy now effectively being conducted jointly by the BdL and Ministry of
Finance, policy plans need to be well-coordinated.
38.
The exchange rate peg has been important for financial stability. The peg has acted
as an important nominal anchor for the economy. In addition, the government’s high foreigncurrency debt and balance-sheet mismatches of corporations and households suggest that the
peg remains the adequate exchange rate regime. While maintaining the peg, efforts should
continue to reducing these important vulnerabilities over time.
39.
Bank regulation and supervision should continue to focus on preventing
excessive risk taking. The banks’ conservative funding and—the large exposure to the
sovereign aside—asset structures, backed by effective banking supervision and regulation, have
limited exposures to global liquidity conditions and the real estate market. However, high liquidity
and declining interest rates are leading banks to increase private sector credit and expand their
businesses in the region. Bank supervision and regulation should hence remain vigilant, with
heightened focus on the banks’ regionalization.
40.
The medium-term fiscal strategy should target a substantial reduction in the public
debt-to-GDP ratio, while allowing space for permanently higher investment and social
spending. These goals can be achieved by rationalizing current expenditures, in particular
reducing budget transfers to the electricity sector, and putting in place a socially balanced tax
package.
41.
The medium-term fiscal strategy should be supported by a number of institutional
reforms. These include strengthening the tax administration and reenergizing the
implementation of public financial management reforms. In particular, a strong framework needs
to be put in place to minimize the risk of contingent liabilities stemming from PPPs. In addition,
reforming the telecom sector, through privatization or otherwise, would help unlock the sector’s
large growth potential.
42.
The BdL’s balance sheet is in need for strengthening. The sterilized accumulation of
international reserves, while appropriate, has weakened the net income position of the BdL.
While lower interest rates and a slower pace of reserve accumulation are already helping to ease
the drain of the sterilization operations on the BdL’s finances, the authorities should devise a
medium-term plan to bolster the BdL’s balance sheet.

19
43.
Clear, timely and proactive communication of policy intentions will be important to
anchor expectations and confidence, and build ownership for necessary reforms.
Communication of the government’s debt reduction objective will be particularly relevant. The
intended movement toward multi-year fiscal frameworks is a welcome step in this regard.
Similarly, the BdL should clearly present its policy objectives, including its views on the adequacy
of international reserves, to help guide market expectations especially at time of policy shifts.
44.
The statistical system needs to be further improved. Despite recent efforts, data
insufficiencies, including in the areas of the national accounts, employment and wage statistics,
coverage of the fiscal accounts, and balance of payments statistics, still hamper economic
analysis and policy development. A high-level commitment from the government is needed to
push the statistical reform agenda forward.
45.

It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle.

20
Table 1. Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008-15
(Population: 3.9 million; 2009)
(Per capita GDP: US$8,467; 2009)
(Quota: SDR 203 million)
(Poverty rate: 28 percent; 2004-05)
(Unemployment: 8.1 percent; 2007)

2008

Prel.
2009

Output and prices
Real GDP (market prices)
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (end-of- period) 1/
Consumer prices (period average) 1/

9.3
9.3
6.4
10.8

9.0
5.8
3.4
1.2

Investment and saving
Gross capital formation
Government
Nongovernment
Gross national savings
Government
Nongovernment

30.0
1.6
28.4
20.7
-8.0
28.7

30.2
1.5
28.7
20.7
-6.7
27.4

Central government finances (cash basis)
Revenue (including grants)
of which: grants
Expenditure
Budget balance (including grants)
Primary balance (including grants)
Primary balance (excluding grants)
Total government debt

23.8
0.9
33.4
-9.6
1.4
0.6
157

24.6
0.4
32.7
-8.1
3.0
2.6
148

Monetary sector
Credit to the private sector
Broad money 2/
Velocity of broad money (level)
Interest rates (period average, in percent)
Three-month treasury bill yield
Two-year treasury bill yield

18.5
15.5
0.37
5.2
8.6

2010

2011

Proj.
2012
2013

2014

2015

(Annual percentage change)
8.0
5.0
4.0
5.0
3.5
2.2
4.7
2.8
2.2
5.0
3.5
2.2

4.0
2.2
2.2
2.2

4.0
2.2
2.2
2.2

4.0
2.2
2.2
2.2

31.0
2.6
28.5
20.0
-6.1
26.0

(In percent of GDP)
31.0
29.8
3.5
2.5
27.4
27.4
19.8
19.4
-6.1
-5.7
25.9
25.1

29.2
2.7
26.5
19.2
-5.2
24.4

28.6
2.6
26.0
18.7
-5.6
24.4

28.5
2.5
26.0
18.6
-6.0
24.6

24.1
0.4
32.8
-8.7
1.5
1.2
139

(In percent of GDP)
24.1
24.2
0.2
0.3
33.7
32.3
-9.6
-8.1
0.5
1.5
0.3
1.2
137
137

24.5
0.3
32.3
-7.8
1.5
1.1
137

24.5
0.2
32.7
-8.2
1.5
1.3
137

24.5
0.2
33.0
-8.5
1.5
1.3
138

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
15.1
18.0
9.7
9.0
9.0
9.0
23.2
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
0.35
0.35
0.34
0.33
0.31
0.29

9.0
12.0
0.28

5.0
7.6

...
5.8

...
6.3

...
6.9

...
7.4

External sector
Exports of goods (in US$, percentage change)
Imports of goods (in US$, percentage change)
Balance of goods and services
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Current account (including official transfers)
Foreign direct investment
Total external debt 3/
Gross reserves (excluding gold), in billions of U.S. dollars
In months of next year imports of goods and services
In percent of short-term external debt 4/
In percent of banking system foreign currency deposits
In percent of total banking system deposits

29.1
36.3
-17.9
-9.7
-9.3
8.8
172
18.8
7.9
45.7
34.7
24.1

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
-10.2
12.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
-2.3
12.0
7.2
8.0
8.5
-16.2
-15.9
-15.9
-16.0
-16.4
-9.7
-11.3
-11.2
-10.5
-10.0
-9.5
-11.1
-11.2
-10.4
-9.9
10.7
10.0
9.7
9.4
9.2
171
160
162
169
178
27.4
29.6
31.8
35.1
40.8
10.3
10.3
10.3
10.6
11.4
55.2
55.4
53.2
52.4
53.2
44.4
44.4
43.4
43.4
45.7
28.6
27.5
26.5
26.0
27.0

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign-exchange-denominated bank deposits (percent change)
Commercial bank total assets
Real effective exchange rate (annual average, percent change)
Stock market index
EMBI Global - Lebanon (spread; basis points)

29.9
4.0
315
-3.0
1182
794

34.5
14.1
334
7.1
1566
293

39.1
7.7
330
...
...
…

42.5
10.3
341
...
...
...

45.2
10.3
359
...
...
...

48.1
10.3
379
...
...
...

...
7.7

...
7.8

8.0
8.5
-17.1
-9.9
-9.9
8.9
188
47.2
12.3
55.7
48.0
27.8

8.0
8.5
-17.8
-9.9
-9.9
8.7
198
53.0
13.8
54.7
48.9
27.9

51.1
10.2
400
...
...
...

54.3
10.2
422
...
...
...

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Through 2008: based on the CPI index by Consultation and Research Institute; from 2009: based on the CPI index by Central Administration
of Statistics.
2/ Defined as currency in circulation plus resident and non-resident deposits.
3/ Includes non-resident deposits.
4/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis, including short-term non-resident deposits.

21
Table 2. Lebanon: Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing, 2008–15
2008
Year
Act.

2009
Year
Act.

2010
Q1
Proj.

2014
Year
Proj.

2015
Year
Proj.

Revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on property
Taxes on domestic goods and services
Taxes on international trade 1/
Other taxes
Nontax revenue
Other treasury revenue
Grants

10,741
10,354
7,183
1,564
786
2,895
1,588
350
2,613
558
387

12,802
12,591
8,968
1,839
809
3,260
2,664
396
3,065
558
210

3,082
3,082
2,360
430
275
867
663
125
553
170
0

14,224
14,006
10,280
2,314
977
3,730
2,831
429
2,924
802
218

15,454
15,302
11,177
2,587
1,140
3,980
3,004
466
3,268
857
152

16,496
16,300
11,935
2,834
1,212
4,247
3,146
496
3,474
891
196

17,718
17,496
12,875
3,267
1,288
4,498
3,295
527
3,693
927
223

18,857
18,717
13,829
3,643
1,369
4,806
3,451
560
3,925
964
139

20,028
19,889
14,717
3,919
1,454
5,134
3,615
595
4,169
1,003
139

Total expenditures
Current primary expenditure
Wages, salaries and pensions
Transfers to EDL 2/
Other current 3/ 4/ 5/
Interest payments
Domestic currency debt
Foreign currency debt
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Foreign financed

15,101
9,393
3,969
2,315
3,109
4,979
2,847
2,132
729
425
304

17,092
10,536
4,936
2,165
3,435
5,799
3,663
2,136
757
478
279

3,945
2,355
1,233
483
639
1,401
918
483
189
123
66

19,335
11,784
5,234
2,302
4,248
6,023
3,851
2,172
1,528
1,078
450

21,595
12,879
5,687
2,576
4,616
6,485
4,126
2,359
2,231
1,326
905

22,052
13,789
6,047
2,835
4,907
6,582
4,156
2,426
1,681
900
780

23,414
14,725
6,428
3,080
5,217
6,747
4,275
2,472
1,942
1,265
678

25,191
15,707
6,831
3,333
5,544
7,490
4,817
2,672
1,994
1,517
477

26,979
16,772
7,257
3,626
5,890
8,162
5,303
2,859
2,045
1,565
480

Overall balance (checks issued)
Primary balance (checks issued)

-4,360
619

-4,290
1,509

-863
538

-5,111
912

-6,141
344

-5,556
1,026

-5,696
1,051

-6,334
1,155

-6,951
1,212

33

62

103

2

6

7

8

1

1

Overall balance (cash basis)
Primary balance (cash basis)

-4,327
652

-4,228
1,571

-760
641

-5,109
914

-6,135
351

-5,549
1,033

-5,688
1,059

-6,333
1,156

-6,949
1,213

Net financing
Banking system
Government institutions
Other creditors
Net change in arrears
Exceptional financing
Change in accrued interest 6/
Valuation adjustment

4,327
3,232
266
1,014
0
0
-267
82

4,228
4,856
1,016
-1,615
0
0
-28
0

760
1,267
-112
-470
0
0
3
72

5,109
5,098
346
-334
0
0
0
0

6,135
4,546
564
1,024
0
0
0
0

5,549
4,502
620
427
0
0
0
0

5,688
4,373
329
986
0
0
0
0

6,333
5,071
444
818
0
0
0
0

6,949
5,799
874
277
0
0
0
0

232
70,888
31,881

1,298
77,019
32,046

538
77,588
31,935

694
82,013
32,458

192
88,147
34,277

830
93,696
35,080

828
99,385
38,250

1,016
105,718
41,186

1,072
112,667
41,451

Year
Proj.

2011
Year
Proj.

2012
Year
Proj.

2013
Year
Proj.

(In billions of Lebanese pounds, unless otherwise indicated)

Statistical discrepancy/float

Memorandum items:
Primary balance on a checks issued
basis (excluding grants)
Total government debt
Of which: foreign denominated debt

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Includes domestic excises, which are collected at customs and are classified as taxes on international trade.
2/ Excludes principal and interest payments paid on behalf of EdL.
3/ Includes transfers to the National social security fund (NSSF), bread subsidy, Displaced Fund, and Council of the South.
4/ Includes transfers to hospitals, High Relief Committee, and the interest subsidy.
5/ Includes transfers to municipalities.
6/ Public debt figures include accrued interest.

22
Table 3. Lebanon: Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing, 2008-15
2008
Year
Act.

2009
Year
Act.

2010
Year
Proj.

2011
Year
Proj.

2012
Year
Proj.

Revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on property
Taxes on domestic goods and services
Taxes on international trade 1/
Other taxes
Nontax revenue
Other treasury revenue
Grants

23.8
22.9
15.9
3.5
1.7
6.4
3.5
0.8
5.8
1.2
0.9

24.6
24.2
17.2
3.5
1.6
6.3
5.1
0.8
5.9
1.1
0.4

24.1
23.7
17.4
3.9
1.7
6.3
4.8
0.7
5.0
1.4
0.4

24.1
23.9
17.4
4.0
1.8
6.2
4.7
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.2

24.2
23.9
17.5
4.2
1.8
6.2
4.6
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.3

Total expenditures
Current primary expenditure
Wages, salaries and pensions
Transfers to EDL 2/
Other current 3/ 4/ 5/
Interest payments
Domestic currency debt
Foreign currency debt
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Foreign financed

33.5
20.8
8.8
5.1
6.9
11.0
6.3
4.7
1.6
0.9
0.7

32.8
20.2
9.5
4.2
6.6
11.1
7.0
4.1
1.5
0.9
0.5

32.8
20.0
8.9
3.9
7.2
10.2
6.5
3.7
2.6
1.8
0.8

33.7
20.1
8.9
4.0
7.2
10.1
6.4
3.7
3.5
2.1
1.4

Overall balance (checks issued)
Primary balance (checks issued)

-9.7
1.4

-8.2
2.9

-8.7
1.5

0.1

0.1

Overall balance (cash basis)
Primary balance (cash basis)

-9.6
1.4

Net financing
Banking system
Government institutions
Other creditors
Net change in arrears
Exceptional financing
Change in accrued interest 6/
Valuation adjustment

2013
Year
Proj.

2014
Year
Proj.

2015
Year
Proj.

24.5
24.1
17.8
4.5
1.8
6.2
4.5
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.3

24.5
24.3
18.0
4.7
1.8
6.2
4.5
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.2

24.5
24.3
18.0
4.8
1.8
6.3
4.4
0.7
5.1
1.2
0.2

32.3
20.2
8.9
4.2
7.2
9.7
6.1
3.6
2.5
1.3
1.1

32.3
20.3
8.9
4.2
7.2
9.3
5.9
3.4
2.7
1.7
0.9

32.7
20.4
8.9
4.3
7.2
9.7
6.3
3.5
2.6
2.0
0.6

33.0
20.5
8.9
4.4
7.2
10.0
6.5
3.5
2.5
1.9
0.6

-9.6
0.5

-8.1
1.5

-7.8
1.5

-8.2
1.5

-8.5
1.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-8.1
3.0

-8.7
1.5

-9.6
0.5

-8.1
1.5

-7.8
1.5

-8.2
1.5

-8.5
1.5

9.6
7.2
0.6
2.2
0.0
0.0
-0.6
0.2

8.1
9.3
2.0
-3.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0

8.7
8.6
0.6
-0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

9.6
7.1
0.9
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

8.1
6.6
0.9
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

7.8
6.0
0.5
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

8.2
6.6
0.6
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

8.5
7.1
1.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.5
45,124
157

2.5
52,051
148

1.2
59,018
139

0.3
64,128
137

1.2
68,180
137

1.1
72,482
137

1.3
77,021
137

1.3
81,825
138

45

42

40

39

37

39

39

37

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Statistical discrepancy/float

Memorandum items:
Primary balance on a checks issued
basis (excluding grants)
Nominal GDP (Annual and in billions of LL)
Total government debt (in percent of GDP)
Of which: foreign denominated debt (in
percent of gross debt)

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Includes domestic excises, which are collected at customs and are classified as taxes on international trade.
2/ Excludes principal and interest payments paid on behalf of EdL.
3/ Includes transfers to the National social security fund (NSSF), bread subsidy, Displaced Fund, and Council of the South.
4/ Includes transfers to hospitals, High Relief Committee, and the interest subsidy.
5/ Includes transfers to municipalities.
6/ Public debt figures include accrued interest.

23
Table 4. Lebanon: Government Debt, 2008-15 1/
2008
Year
Act.

2009
Year
Act.

2010
Q1
Prel.

Year
Proj.

2011
Year
Proj.

2012
Year
Proj.

2013
Year
Proj.

2014
Year
Proj.

2015
Year
Proj.

61,297

65,499

70,108

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Net debt 2/
Gross debt by holder
Banking system
Treasury bills
Other domestic loans
Eurobonds
Nonbanks
Treasury bills
Government institutions 3/
Other
Eurobonds
Concessional loans
Foreign currency Tbonds
Government deposits

43,585

46,366

46,822

49,758

53,843

57,524

47,024
33,093
21,652
305
11,136
13,930
3,918
3,358
560
6,653
3,081
278

51,091
37,558
24,693
263
12,603
13,533
4,878
4,032
846
5,402
2,957
297

51,468
38,321
25,053
264
13,004
13,147
4,967
3,958
1,009
5,058
2,826
297

54,404
40,863
27,260
264
13,338
13,542
5,348
4,261
1,086
5,188
2,988
19

58,489
43,878
29,654
264
13,960
14,611
5,817
4,635
1,182
5,430
3,346
19

62,170
46,865
32,286
264
14,315
15,306
6,333
5,047
1,287
5,568
3,386
19

65,944
49,765
33,682
264
15,819
16,178
6,607
5,265
1,342
6,153
3,400
19

70,145
53,129
35,566
264
17,299
17,016
6,977
5,560
1,417
6,728
3,310
0

74,755
56,976
39,273
264
17,439
17,779
7,704
6,139
1,565
6,783
3,292
0

3,439

4,724

4,646

4,646

4,646

4,646

4,646

4,646

4,646

(in percent of GDP)
Net debt 2/

146

134

120

127

127

127

127

128

129

Gross debt by holder
Banking system
Treasury bills
Other domestic loans
Eurobonds
Nonbanks
Treasury bills
Government Institutions 3/
Other
Eurobonds
Concessional loans
Foreign currency Tbonds

157
111
72
1
37
47
13
11
2
22
10
1

148
109
72
1
36
39
14
12
2
16
9
1

131
98
64
1
33
34
13
10
3
13
7
1

139
104
70
1
34
35
14
11
3
13
8
0

137
103
70
1
33
34
14
11
3
13
8
0

137
104
71
1
32
34
14
11
3
12
7
0

137
104
70
1
33
34
14
11
3
13
7
0

137
104
70
1
34
33
14
11
3
13
6
0

138
105
72
0
32
33
14
11
3
12
6
0

11

14

12

12

11

10

10

9

9

45,124

52,051

59,018

59,018

64,128

68,180

72,482

77,021

81,825

45

42

41

40

39

37

39

39

37

Government deposits
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP
Foreign currency debt (in
percent of gross debt)

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Includes all debt contracted by the treasury on behalf of the central government and public agencies other than the
Banque du Liban; accrued interest; and Banque du Liban lending to Electricite du Liban. Excludes possible government
arrears to the private sector.
2/ Defined as gross debt less government deposits.
3/ Denominated in domestic currency; mainly to the National Social Security Fund, and the National Deposit Insurance Fund.

24
Table 5. Lebanon: Monetary Survey, 2008-12
2008
Act.

2009

2010

2011

2012

Act.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

(In billions of Lebanese pounds)
Net foreign assets
Banque du Liban
Commercial banks

59,271
36,927
22,344

81,428
52,665
28,763

86,953
57,346
29,607

95,989
61,034
34,955

107,472
66,383
41,088

Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
of which: Net claims on government
Banque du Liban
Commercial banks
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)

61,590
41,397
42,751
4,437
38,314
32,056
-11,863

67,418
46,655
48,233
4,422
43,812
36,903
-16,140

79,754
51,707
53,341
3,765
49,575
43,550
-15,503

90,723
56,253
57,887
3,044
54,843
47,763
-13,293

101,646
60,755
62,389
2,250
60,139
52,054
-11,163

Broad money (M5) 1/
In Lebanese pounds
Currency in circulation
Deposits in Lebanese pounds
Deposits in foreign currency

120,862
38,692
2,175
36,517
82,170

148,845
55,062
2,383
52,679
93,784

166,707
65,640
2,669
62,971
101,066

186,712
75,257
2,989
72,268
111,455

209,117
86,251
3,348
82,903
122,866

(Year-on-year percent change)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net claims on public sector
Claims on private sector
Broad money (M5) 1/
In Lebanese pounds
Deposits in foreign currency

17.0
14.0
7.1
18.5
15.5
51.5
3.9

37.4
9.5
12.7
15.1
23.2
42.3
14.1

6.8
18.3
10.8
18.0
12.0
19.2
7.8

10.4
13.8
8.8
9.7
12.0
14.7
10.3

12.0
12.0
8.0
9.0
12.0
14.6
10.2

Memorandum items:
(In billions of Lebanese pounds, except where otherwise indicated)
Banque du Liban:
Net foreign exchange position 2/
Foreign assets
Foreign currency liabilities
Net foreign exchange position, in millions of U.S. dollars 2/
Claims on public sector (net)
Claims on commercial banks
Reserve money
GIR (including gold), in millions of U.S. dollars 3/
GIR (excluding gold), in millions of U.S. dollars 4/
in percent of banking system foreign currency deposits
in percent of total banking system deposits
Foreign currency deposits in percent of total private sector deposits

12,382
40,809
28,427
8,214
4,415
-6,689
9,430
26,801
18,769
34.7
24.1

27,209
56,843
29,634
18,049
4,433
-18,352
10,766
37,467
27,405
44.4
28.6

30,138
61,210
31,073
19,992
3,711
-20,597
12,648
40,394
29,559
44.4
27.5

31,915
64,615
32,700
21,171
2,990
-22,083
14,428
42,682
31,848
43.4
26.5

35,166
69,531
34,365
23,327
2,196
-24,642
16,456
45,973
35,138
43.4
26.0

69.6

64.5

62.0

61.0

60.0

Sources: Banque du Liban; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Broad money (M5) is defined as M3 (currency + resident deposits) + non-resident deposits.
2/ Defined by currency (not by residency), as official foreign currency assets, including gold and SDR, less foreign currency liabilities.
Liabilities include the exceptional deposits by GCC governments, but exclude liabilities to the government of Lebanon and other
official creditors.
3/ Defined as all official foreign currency assets, less encumbered foreign assets.
4/ Defined as all official foreign currency assets, less encumbered foreign assets and gold.

25
Table 6. Lebanon: Balance of Payments, 2008–15
2008
Est.

2009
Prel.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account (excl. official transfers)
Goods (net)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Services (net)
Income (net)
Of which: interest on government debt
Current transfers (net) 1/

-2,902
-11,010
5,251
-16,261
5,666
-810
-563
3,252

-3,350
-11,179
4,716
-15,895
5,569
-768
-429
3,027

-4,435
-12,520
5,282
-17,802
6,293
-1,758
-572
3,549

-4,779
-13,379
5,705
-19,084
6,614
-2,038
-603
4,025

-4,729
-14,450
6,161
-20,611
7,226
-1,918
-616
4,413

-4,790
-15,709
6,654
-22,362
7,808
-1,575
-620
4,686

-5,083
-17,077
7,186
-24,263
8,338
-1,482
-679
5,138

-5,394
-18,565
7,761
-26,326
8,915
-1,376
-700
5,632

Capital and financial account
Capital transfers (net)
Direct investment (net) 2/
Portfolio investment, loans, other capital
Government (net) 3/
BdL 4/
Of which: IMF repurchases
Banks (net) 5/
Foreign assets of banks 6/
Non-resident deposits 5/
Non-bank private sector (net)

7,298
124
2,620
4,554
-404
37
0
4,820
1,836
2,985
101

8,257
66
3,678
4,513
-951
196
0
1,742
-4,257
6,000
3,526

6,169
50
3,916
2,203
-326
-208
-19
1,429
-560
1,989
1,309

6,822
19
4,139
2,664
171
-188
-38
-1,320
-3,548
2,227
4,000

7,930
21
4,268
3,642
-34
-288
-38
-1,574
-4,068
2,495
5,537

10,380
22
4,414
5,944
199
-269
-19
-626
-3,420
2,794
6,641

11,242
23
4,571
6,648
96
-250
0
-749
-3,879
3,129
7,551

10,891
25
4,706
6,160
-140
-250
0
-2,247
-5,752
3,505
8,798

Errors and omissions

2,298

2,940

0

0

0

0

0

0

Overall balance

6,694

7,846

1,734

2,043

3,201

5,591

6,159

5,497

-6,694
-7,273
578
133
406
40

-7,846
-8,636
790
73
716
0

-1,734
-2,154
420
95
325
0

-2,043
-2,289
246
22
224
0

-3,201
-3,291
90
23
67
0

-5,591
-5,694
103
24
79
0

-6,159
-6,412
253
26
227
0

-5,497
-5,751
254
28
227
0

-2,769

-3,277

-4,340

-4,757

-4,706

-4,765

-5,057

-5,366

-9.3
-9.7
18,769
172
29.2
29,933

-9.5
-9.7
27,405
171
24.6
34,528

-11.1
-11.3
29,559
160
21.7
39,149

-11.2
-11.2
31,848
162
20.9
42,539

-10.4
-10.5
35,138
169
19.7
45,227

-9.9
-10.0
40,832
178
19.1
48,081

-9.9
-9.9
47,244
188
18.4
51,092

-9.9
-9.9
52,996
198
17.2
54,279

Financing
Official reserves (- increase)
Exceptional financing
Budgetary grants
Budgetary loans 7/
IMF purchases
Memorandum items:
Current account (incl. official transfers)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Including official transfers
Excluding official transfers
Gross official reserves (excl. gold, year-end) 8/
External debt (year-end; in percent of GDP) 9/
Government external debt (in percent of GDP)
GDP

Sources: Lebanese authorities; BIS; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding official budgetary transfers.
2/ From 2009: includes new data source for real estate investment.
3/ Excluding budgetary loan disbursements.
4/ Change in the foreign liabilities of the BdL, excluding IMF purchases.
5/ Differs from banks' reported data, to include estimated deposit flows by Lebanese nationals living abroad but classified as residents.
6/ Net of non-deposit foreign liabilities.
7/ Including disbursements of non-war/non-Paris III related project loans.
8/ Excludes Eurobonds and encumbered reserves.
9/ Includes all banking deposits held by non-residents, including estimated deposits of Lebanese nationals living abroad but classified as
residents.

26

Table 7. Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008-15, Reform Scenario
2008
Output
Real GDP (market prices)
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
GDP deflator
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Central government finances (cash basis)
Revenue (including grants)
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Expenditure
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Budget balance (including grants)
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Primary balance (including grants)
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Total government debt
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Monetary sector
Credit to the private sector
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Broad money 1/
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario
Two-year treasury bill yield
Baseline scenario
Reform scenario

Prel.
2009

2010

2011

Proj.
2012
2013

2014

2015

(Annual percentage change)
9.3
...

9.0
...

8.0
8.0

5.0
5.0

4.0
5.0

4.0
5.0

4.0
5.0

4.0
5.0

9.3
...

5.8
...

5.0
5.0

3.5
3.5

2.2
2.2

2.2
2.2

2.2
2.2

2.2
2.2

(In percent of GDP)
23.8
...

24.6
...

24.1
24.1

24.1
26.0

24.2
26.6

24.5
26.9

24.5
26.8

24.5
26.4

33.4
...

32.7
...

32.8
32.3

33.7
32.8

32.3
31.7

32.3
30.2

32.7
28.9

33.0
27.6

-9.6
...

-8.1
...

-8.7
-8.2

-9.6
-6.8

-8.1
-5.1

-7.8
-3.3

-8.2
-2.1

-8.5
-1.2

1.4
...

3.0
...

1.5
2.0

0.5
3.1

1.5
3.6

1.5
4.3

1.5
5.0

1.5
5.1

157
...

148
...

139
139

137
134

137
130

137
125

137
118

138
106

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
18.5
...

15.1
...

18.0
18.0

9.7
11.0

9.0
10.7

9.0
10.7

9.0
10.8

9.0
14.6

15.5
...

23.2
...

12.0
12.0

12.0
10.0

12.0
6.5

12.0
6.5

12.0
6.5

12.0
6.5

8.6
...

7.6
...

5.8
5.8

6.3
5.7

6.9
5.7

7.4
5.7

7.7
5.5

7.8
5.6

-9.9
-8.8

-9.9
-7.9

8.9
8.6

8.7
11.2

188
140

198
133

47.2
37.9

53.0
40.3

27.8
26.5

27.9
26.4

External sector
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account (including official transfers)
Baseline scenario
-9.3
-9.5
-11.1
-11.2
-10.4
-9.9
Reform scenario
...
...
-11.1
-10.7
-10.4
-9.4
Foreign direct investment
Baseline scenario
8.8
10.7
10.0
9.7
9.4
9.2
Reform scenario
...
...
10.0
9.7
9.3
8.9
Total external debt 2/
Baseline scenario
172
171
160
162
169
178
Reform scenario
...
...
161
158
151
145
Gross reserves (excluding gold), in billions of U.S. dollars
Baseline scenario
18.8
27.4
29.6
31.8
35.1
40.8
Reform scenario
...
...
29.7
31.8
32.5
34.9
Gross reserves (excluding gold), in percent of total banking system deposits
Baseline scenario
24.1
28.6
27.5
26.5
26.0
27.0
Reform scenario
...
...
27.7
26.9
25.8
26.0
Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Defined as currency in circulation plus resident and non-resident deposits.
2/ Includes non-resident deposits.

27
Table 8. Lebanon: Central Government Overall Deficit and Financing: 2008–15, Reform Scenario
2008
Year
Act.

2009
Year
Act.

2010
Year
Proj.

2011
Year
Proj.

2012
Year
Proj.

Revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on property
Taxes on domestic goods and services
Taxes on international trade 1/
Other taxes
Nontax revenue
Other treasury revenue
Grants

23.8
22.9
15.9
3.5
1.7
6.4
3.5
0.8
5.8
1.2
0.9

24.6
24.2
17.2
3.5
1.6
6.3
5.1
0.8
5.9
1.1
0.4

24.1
23.7
17.4
3.9
1.7
6.3
4.8
0.7
5.0
1.4
0.4

26.0
25.8
19.3
4.4
1.7
7.5
5.0
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.2

26.6
26.3
19.9
4.9
1.7
7.5
5.0
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.3

Total expenditures
Current primary expenditure
Wages, salaries and pensions
Transfers to EDL 2/
Other current 3/ 4/ 5/
Interest payments
Domestic currency debt
Foreign currency debt
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Foreign financed

33.5
20.8
8.8
5.1
6.9
11.0
6.3
4.7
1.6
0.9
0.7

32.8
20.2
9.5
4.2
6.6
11.1
7.0
4.1
1.5
0.9
0.5

32.3
20.0
8.9
3.9
7.2
10.2
6.5
3.7
2.1
1.4
0.8

32.8
19.4
8.9
2.8
7.7
9.9
6.2
3.7
3.5
2.1
1.4

Overall balance (checks issued)
Primary balance (checks issued)

-9.7
1.4

-8.2
2.9

-8.2
2.0

0.1

0.1

Overall balance (cash basis)
Primary balance (cash basis)

-9.6
1.4

Net financing
Banking system
Government institutions
Other creditors
Net change in arrears
Exceptional financing 6/
Change in accrued interest 7/
Valuation adjustment

2013
Year
Proj.

2014
Year
Proj.

2015
Year
Proj.

26.9
26.5
20.2
5.3
1.7
7.5
5.0
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.3

26.8
26.6
20.3
5.3
1.7
7.5
5.0
0.7
5.1
1.3
0.2

26.4
26.2
21.2
5.3
1.7
8.5
5.0
0.7
3.8
1.2
0.2

31.7
19.1
8.9
2.0
8.2
8.7
5.3
3.5
3.8
2.7
1.1

30.2
18.3
8.9
1.2
8.2
7.6
4.5
3.1
4.3
3.3
0.9

28.9
17.8
8.9
0.8
8.2
7.1
4.2
2.9
3.9
3.3
0.6

27.6
17.2
8.9
0.2
8.2
6.4
3.8
2.6
4.0
3.4
0.6

-6.8
3.1

-5.1
3.6

-3.3
4.3

-2.1
5.0

-1.2
5.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-8.1
3.0

-8.2
2.0

-6.8
3.1

-5.1
3.6

-3.3
4.3

-2.1
5.0

-1.2
5.1

9.6
7.2
0.6
2.2
0.0
0.0
-0.6
0.2

8.1
9.3
2.0
-3.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0

8.2
8.3
0.5
-0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

6.8
4.7
0.5
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

5.1
4.1
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.3
2.5
0.1
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.1
1.7
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.2
-3.1
0.3
-1.9
0.0
5.9
0.0
0.0

0.5
45,124
157

2.5
52,051
148

1.6
59,018
139

2.9
64,139
134

3.3
68,847
130

4.0
73,895
125

4.9
79,278
118

5.0
85,046
106

45

42

40

40

39

40

41

36

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Statistical discrepancy/float

Memorandum items:
Primary balance on a checks issued
basis (excluding grants)
Nominal GDP (Annual and in billions of LL)
Total government debt (in percent of GDP)
Of which: foreign denominated debt (in
percent of gross debt)

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Includes domestic excises, which are collected at customs and are classified as taxes on international trade.
2/ Excludes principal and interest payments paid on behalf of EdL.
3/ Includes transfers to the National social security fund (NSSF), bread subsidy, Displaced Fund, and Council of the South.
4/ Includes transfers to hospitals, High Relief Committee, and the interest subsidy.
5/ Includes transfers to municipalities.
6/ Privatization of the Telecom takes places in 2015.
7/ Public debt figures include accrued interest.

28
Table 9. Lebanon: Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators, 2006–10
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Mar

(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)

74,271

82,255

94,255

115,250

119,913

Capital
Capital adequacy ratio 1/
Capital to asset ratio

25.0
9.1

12.5
8.9

12.1
8.5

12.4
7.0

n.a.
6.8

Asset quality
Net problem loans/net total loans
Net problem loans/bank capital
Provisions against problem loans/problem loans
Total provisions/problem loans

6.8
14.3
54.4
72.4

4.7
11.5
56.9
76.8

3.1
8.4
61.3
86.4

2.3
6.9
64.4
98.4

2.1
6.9
63.4
101.0

Asset concentration
Share of claims on government
Of which: T-bills
Of which: Eurobonds
Share of claims on BdL
Of which: Certificates of Deposit
Share of claims on private sector
Share of claims on nonresidents
Of which: foreign banks
Net foreign currency assets as percent of capital

27.9
13.4
14.4
27.0
11.7
20.6
18.8
16.5
15.5

26.1
12.6
13.5
24.7
9.0
21.6
20.9
17.7
18.4

27.0
15.9
11.0
27.8
12.1
22.3
16.3
12.1
18.9

25.2
15.1
10.1
30.7
16.3
21.0
16.6
13.0
15.0

24.6
14.6
9.9
31.4
16.9
21.5
15.6
11.5
17.7

Earnings
Average return on assets (post tax)
Average return on equity (post tax)
Net interest margin

0.9
10.1
2.0

1.0
12.1
2.0

1.1
13.8
2.1

1.1
14.4
1.9

1.0
14.5
1.8

Liquidity
Net liquid assets/total assets
Net liquid assets/short-term liabilities
Private sector deposits/assets
Nonresident deposits/assets

42.9
51.0
69.1
12.6

40.3
47.9
70.1
11.7

42.3
50.1
70.3
12.2

69.9
54.2
68.7
14.4

67.5
52.1
68.4
13.4

Other indicators 2/
Change in assets (12 month, in percent)
Change in private sector credit (12 month, in percent)
Change in deposits (12 month, in percent)
FC deposits/total deposits
FC loans/total loans
FC loans/GDP

7.2
-5.6
6.5
72.5
83.0
57.3

12.7
15.9
10.8
75.9
83.4
59.8

14.3
18.6
15.6
77.0
83.2
59.1

22.5
15.2
23.1
69.2
80.6
57.1

22.4
20.2
21.9
62.9
79.6
52.9

Memorandum items:
LL deposit rate (average)
LL loan rate (average)
FC deposit rate (average)
FC loan rate (average)
Government's 3-year T-bill rate (marginal)
Government's Eurobond rate (marginal) 3/
Spread over 5-year U.S. note 3/

7.5
10.3
4.4
8.5
9.5
7.5
2.8

7.5
10.3
4.8
8.3
9.5
8.9
4.5

7.3
10.0
3.7
7.5
9.4
9.0
6.2

7.0
9.6
3.2
7.3
8.6
7.2
5.0

6.1
8.7
2.9
7.2
6.7
5.3
2.9

22.4

25.1

29.9

34.5

39.1

GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4/

Sources: Banque du Liban, Banking Control Commission and staff estimates.
1/ From 2007: based on Basel II risk weights.
2/ FC and LL stand for "foreign currency" and "Lebanese pound," respectively.
3/ 2010 March data is the average of 2010 Q1.
4/ March 2010 reflects staff projection for 2010.

29
Table 10. Lebanon: Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 2006-10
2006
Act.

2007
Act.

2008
Act.

2009
Act.

2010
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Monetary and financial indicators
Broad money, M5
Annual percentage change
Private sector credit (annual percentage change)

62,606
6.4
-5.7

69,423
10.9
15.8

80,174
15.5
18.5

98,737
23.2
15.1

110,585
12.0
18.0

Public finance indicators
Overall fiscal balance
In percent of GDP
In percent of government revenue
Interest payments on debt
In percent of GDP
In percent of government revenue
Nominal GDP
Government revenue

-2,523
-11.2
-44.8
2,906
13.0
51.6
22,438
5,631

-2,808
-11.2
-46.6
3,139
12.5
52.1
25,057
6,026

-2,892
-9.7
-40.6
3,303
11.0
46.3
29,933
7,127

-2,846
-8.2
-33.5
3,847
11.1
45.3
34,528
8,495

-3,391
-8.7
-35.9
3,996
10.2
42.3
39,149
9,439

6.8
54.4
25.0
69.1

4.7
56.9
12.5
71.6

3.1
61.3
12.1
71.0

2.3
64.4
12.4
70.9

2.1
63.4
…
73.8

Debt indicators
Gross public debt
In percent of government revenue
In percent of GDP
Of which: foreign currency
In percent of GDP
Gross public debt held by the market
In percent of GDP
External debt 4/
In percent of GDP
External public debt (central government and BDL)
In percent of GDP
Short-term external public debt 5/
Short-term foreign currency public debt 5/
Short-term external debt 4/ 5/
Short-term foreign currency debt 5/ 6/
Total foreign currency deposits

40,365
716.8
179.9
20,330
90.6
27,871
124.2
44,617
198.8
10,222
45.6
1,455
2,039
35,850
54,268
46,319

42,033
697.5
167.7
21,221
84.7
29,206
116.6
48,603
194.0
11,350
45.3
1,456
2,812
38,709
63,019
52,099

47,024
659.8
157.1
21,148
70.7
33,993
113.6
51,624
172.5
11,306
37.8
744
1,113
41,062
63,478
54,175

51,091
601.4
148.0
21,258
61.6
36,229
104.9
59,112
171.2
11,267
32.6
1,773
2,576
49,618
74,116
61,824

54,404
576.4
139.0
21,532
55.0
43,244
110.5
62,752
160.3
11,057
28.2
1,693
2,574
53,388
80,754
66,603

International reserves
Gross official reserves 7/
In percent of short-term external debt
Gross official reserves and commercial banks' foreign assets
In percent of short-term external debt
In percent of short-term foreign currency debt

11,353
32
27,768
77
51

11,496
30
32,206
83
51

18,769
46
37,896
92
60

27,405
55
51,085
103
69

29,559
55
54,984
103
68

External current account indicators
Merchandise exports, f.o.b.
Annual percentage change
Merchandise imports, f.o.b.
Annual percentage change
External current account balance
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services

3,207
40.8
9,345
11.3
-1,182
-5.3
-8.6

4,067
26.8
11,926
27.6
-1,698
-6.8
-10.6

5,251
29.1
16,261
36.3
-2,769
-9.3
-12.2

4,716
-10.2
15,895
-2.3
-3,277
-9.5
-14.3

5,282
12.0
17,802
12.0
-4,340
-11.1
-16.8

Banking-sector indicators
Problem loans (in percent of total loans) 1/
Provisions against problem loans (in percent of problem loans) 2/
Capital adequacy ratio 3/
Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)

Sources: Lebanese authorities; Bank for International Settlements; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Net of provisions and unearned interest)
2/ March 2010 data is used for 2010.
3/ From 2007: based on Basel II risk weights.
4/ Includes estimates for public debt and banking deposits held by non-residents, and non-resident claims on the nonfinancial
5/ On a remaining maturity basis (scheduled amortization over the next year).
6/ Short-term foreign currency debt of the public sector and the banking sector plus external debt of the nonbank sector.
7/ Excludes gold and encumbered assets.

Table 11. Lebanon: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006–15
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
Of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (Paris II and III assistance)
Residual, including asset changes 5/

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012
2013

2014

179.9
89.4

167.7
83.5

157.1
69.7

148.0
60.7

139.0
55.0

137.5
53.4

137.5
51.4

137.2
52.8

137.3
53.5

137.7
50.7

3.9
6.7
-1.7
25.1
23.4
8.4
8.4
9.4
-1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.8

-12.1
-13.9
-1.3
24.0
22.7
-6.3
-6.3
5.8
-12.1
0.0
-6.3
0.0
0.0
-6.3
1.7

-10.6
-17.7
-1.4
23.8
22.4
-16.3
-16.3
-3.2
-13.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.0

-9.1
-12.7
-2.9
24.6
21.7
-9.8
-9.8
2.5
-12.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.5

-9.0
-8.8
-1.5
24.1
22.6
-7.3
-7.3
3.2
-10.4
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

-1.5
-1.5
-0.5
24.1
23.6
-1.0
-1.0
5.4
-6.4
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
-1.5
24.2
22.7
1.5
1.5
6.7
-5.2
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.3
-0.3
-1.5
24.5
23.0
1.1
1.1
6.3
-5.2
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1
-1.5
24.5
23.0
1.6
1.6
6.8
-5.2
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.4
0.4
-1.5
24.5
23.0
1.9
1.9
7.1
-5.2
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

717.1

697.7

660.0

601.6

576.6

570.4

567.9

560.9

560.8

562.7

0.6
7.6
5.5
0.0
2.0
15.2
-1.7

7.5
7.8
3.9
0.0
3.9
4.5
-1.3

9.3
7.9
-1.4
0.0
9.3
7.9
-1.4

9.0
8.2
2.4
0.0
5.8
5.4
-2.9

8.0
7.8
2.8
…
5.0
12.3
-1.5

5.0
7.9
4.4
…
3.5
9.8
-0.5

4.0
7.5
5.2
…
2.2
0.0
-1.5

4.0
7.2
5.0
…
2.2
5.4
-1.5

4.0
7.5
5.4
…
2.2
3.9
-1.5

4.0
7.7
5.6
…
2.2
4.1
-1.5

179.9
179.9

167.7
167.7

157.1
157.1

148.0
148.0

143.4
149.3

142.3
152.2

142.0
154.0

141.3
155.8

140.9
157.4

140.6
158.9

2015

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit
Memorandum items:
Public sector debt based on historical GDP growth data 8/
Public sector debt based on historical data 9/

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff projections.
1/ Central government gross debt.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
7/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.
8/ This path assumes that, from 2010 onwards, real GDP growth is set at its 10-year average level while the primary fiscal balance and real interest rates are the same as in the baseline scenario.
9/ This path assumes that, from 2010 onwards, real interest rate and real GDP growth are set at their 10-year average level while the primary fiscal balance is the same as in the baseline scenario.

Debt-Stabilizing
Primary
Balance 7/
2.1

30

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

2006

31

Figure 1. Lebanon: Public Debt Sustainability, 2005–15
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Panel 2: Real Interest Rate Shock 1/
(In percent)

Panel 1: Baseline Scenario
200

200

180

180

160

160
138

140

i-rate
shock

Hist. 154

140

Baseline
120
100
2005

138

Baseline

120

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

158

100
2005

Panel 3: Growth Shock 1/
(In percent per year)

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Panel 4: Combined Real Interest Rate and
Growth Shock 1/
200

200

Shocks 183

180

180
161

Growth
shock

160

138

Baseline

120
100
2005

Hist.

Hist. 141

140

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

140
138

100
2005

2007

2009

2011

200

180

180

Fiscal shock 150

Baseline

138

Baseline

138

120

120

2009

2011

2013

2015

160
140

140

2007

2013

Panel 6: Reform Scenario 3/

200

100
2005

Baseline

120

Panel 5: Fiscal Shock 2/

160

161

160

2015

100
2005

Reform
scenario
106

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Growth and interest rate shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline scenario and shock
scenario; historical refers to 10-year averages.
2/ The primary balance is one -half standard deviation lower than the 2000-09 average.
3/ Higher primary balance, higher growth, lower interest rates, telecom privatization (as described in
the main text).

32

APPENDIX 1. THE OUTPUT GAP 1
Lebanon’s strong economic growth in recent years has raised questions about potential output
growth and the output gap. Following a series of profound shocks in the early and mid-2000s, Lebanon
has experienced three years of rapid economic growth since 2007, raising the question whether the
recent economic strength constitutes a mere catching up that should be expected to subside, or whether
potential growth may have risen, possibly allowing for high growth to continue into the medium term with
limited risk of overheating.
Common methods to estimate potential output and the output gap yield varying results but
broadly indicate that a large output gap that existed in 2006 virtually closed by 2009. We employ
univariate filtering in the form of the
Output Gap: Range of Estimates
Hodrick-Prescott filter, using two standard
(percent of GDP)
calibrations for the smoothing factor λ. In
15
addition, we pursue a growth accounting
Overheating
Range
10
approach, with income tax payer data and,
Mean
alternatively, employment-linked public health
5
insurance contributions as proxies for
employment in the absence of national labor
0
statistics. Using these methods, five out of
-5
six estimates suggest that the output gap turned
positive in 2009, indicating that slack has been
-10
Slack
eliminated from the economy. The range of
estimates for the output gap (between -3.2 and
-15
+7.6 percent of GDP in 2009) is too large,
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
however, to draw conclusions about its precise
magnitude.
Estimates for potential output growth also vary too widely to draw firm conclusions. Estimates for
2009 potential output growth range from -0.8 percent to 7.1 percent, with half of the estimates pointing to
an increase from past potential output growth,
Output Gap and Potential Output
and the other half suggesting a decline.
Potential Output
Estimates are sensitive to the type of
Growth
Model
Filter Output Gap
specification and to underlying assumptions, not
2002-06
least due to the use of proxies for employment
2009
average
2009
in the absence of employment statistics. This
(percent of
underscores the desirability of developing
GDP)
(percent) (percent)
HP 1/
3.2
4.8
4.2
national labor statistics.
HP Filter
In light of these estimation results, cautious
macroeconomic policies are warranted
going forward. The strongly growing economy
and the evidence of a narrowing or closed
output gap suggest that additional fiscal or
monetary stimulus to the economy could add to
overheating risks.

1

By Harald Finger (MCD).

RU 2/

1.1

7.1

4.1

Tax Payer

HP 1/
RU 2/

-3.2
1.6

4.4
2.9

4.3
4.4

Health Insurance

HP 1/
RU 2/

7.6
4.4

-0.8
2.3

7.7
6.6

Growth Accounting

1/ Filter specification based on Hodrick/Prescott (1997).
2/ Filter specification based on Ravn/Uhlig (2002).

33

APPENDIX 2. INTEREST RATE TRANSMISSION 1
The weak response of deposit interest rates to changes in policy rates raises questions about the
effectiveness of interest rate transmission in Lebanon. Policy interest rates remained flat from 2005
until mid-2008. Subsequently, the sharp fall in world interest rates opened a substantial premium in favor
of LL rates. This resulted in large deposit inflows and
allowed rapid reserve accumulation. To moderate deposit
inflows, policy interest rates (that is, rates on BdL CDs and
government T-Bills) were allowed to fall, but only gradually.
Although the BdL initiated the policy interest rate decline in
mid-2008 and brought rates on key instruments down by
over 350 bps by end-2009, deposit rates did not register a
meaningful fall until early 2009 and declined by far less (a
mere 50 bps) during the 18-month period. Starting 2010,
the decline in market interest rates accelerated, with
deposit rates dropping by 65 bps through end-March.
Moreover, deposit rates could come under further
downward pressure going forward, given that policy rates
have declined by another 70 bps since then.
Econometric analysis shows that interest rate transmission in Lebanon is moderate, and the full
impact of changes in policy rates is only observed with lags of up to 6 months. A monthly VAR
model of the 12-month T-Bill interest rate, the LL deposit rate, and the LL lending rate finds a significant
impact from T-bill rates to deposit rates, with a moderate transmission of 0.28 and 0.53 percent points
after three and six months for a one percentage point change in the T-Bill rate. Variance decomposition
reveals that the T-Bill rate accounts for 30-47 percent of the variation of the deposit rate. The findings
imply that the transmission mechanism in Lebanon works, but imperfectly.
Out-of-sample forecasting suggests that deposit rates may have caught up with earlier policy
interest rate reductions. In a first scenario, the T-bill rate is assumed to remain constant at its May 2010
level (5.18 percent). Because of a faster-than-predicted drop in deposit rates in March, the model
forecasts only a small correction going forward. However, this conclusion is not foregone, because the
recent drop in deposit rates could be due to factors not captured by the parsimonious structure of the
model. A second scenario assumes that the T-bill rate drops to 4.5 percent in June and remains constant
thereafter. In this scenario, the deposit rate would decline very gradually from 6.11 percent in March 2010
to 6.01 percent in January 2011.

1

By Heiko Hesse and Azim Sadikov (both MCD).

34

12
11

12

Lebanon: Forecast with Constant T-bill Rate
(In percent)

11

10

10

9

9

8

8

7

7

6
5
4
3
Jan-08

Lebanon: Forecast with Declining T-bill Rate
(In percent)

6
LL Deposit Rate

5

LL Lending Rate

4

12-month TBill Rate
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

3
Jan-08

LL Deposit Rate
LL Lending Rate
12-month TBill Rate
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Overall, the findings suggest that the BdL should take a cautious approach to further policy
interest rate reductions. The lagged response of deposit interest rates and the substantial drop in policy
rates since March suggest that a pause may be warranted to observe market developments for some
time. The large decline in deposit rates in March could reflect a number of factors not captured by the
model. If so, a further decline in deposit rates could be already in the pipeline and its impact on deposit
inflows should be established.

35

APPENDIX 3: TAX POLICY OPTIONS 1
Lebanon’s tax ratio is about average in relation to regional comparator countries, while its per
capita income and fiscal financing needs are higher. At 17.4 percent of GDP in 2009, the tax ratio
was lower than in Morocco, Tunisia, and Jordan, but higher than in Syria and Egypt. However, Lebanon
has a higher income per capita and higher fiscal financing needs than the comparator countries, which
suggests that its tax ratio is not particularly high once these additional considerations are taken into
account.
Compared to other countries in the region, the tax revenue mix in Lebanon is more tilted toward
“indirect” taxes. Income taxes accounted for 21 percent and property taxes for 9 percent of total tax
revenues in 2009 (“direct” taxes therefore accounted for 30 percent of total tax revenues). Jordan is the
only country in the region with a lower share of direct taxes than Lebanon.

Tax Revenue, 2009
25

23.1

Tax Revenue Composition, 2009

(Percent of GDP)
21.6
18.0

20

17.4
14.8

15

12.2

Tariffs
9%

Other
8%

Income
taxes
21%

10

Property
taxes
9%

Excises
21%

5
0
Morocco Tunisia

Jordan Lebanon Egypt

VAT
32%

Syria

Sources: Lebanese Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff.

Direct Taxes
Lebanon currently has a schedular personal income
tax system by which different types of income are
taxed at different rates. Employment income is taxed at
progressive marginal rates ranging from 2 to 20 percent,
business income/profit is taxed from 4 to 21 percent, and
rental income is taxed from 4 to 14 percent. A flat rate of
15 percent applies to corporations profits. Interest income
is taxed at 5 percent and dividend income is taxed at
10 percent. Capital gains by corporations are taxed at
10 percent while capital gains for individuals are not
taxed. This differential treatment generates distortions
(e.g., a person with business income in the 21 percent
1

Standard profit tax rate
(In percent)
Tunisia

30

Morocco

30

Syria*

28

Jordan

24

Egypt

20

Lebanon

15
0

10

Source: IMF staff.
* top rate

By Pablo Lopez Murphy (FAD), drawing on FAD Technical Assistance provided during May 2010.

20

30

40

36

bracket has an incentive to turn into a corporation to pay less taxes). In addition, it creates horizontal
inequities because individuals with equal total income might be taxed differently if their sources of income
are different.
Income tax reform in Lebanon should seek a more uniform taxation of different types of income.
Ideally all the sources of income of an individual should be aggregated and a progressive tax rate
schedule be applied to total income. However, in practice, virtually no country in the world applies a truly
“global income tax” because taxing the more mobile sources of income is more difficult than taxing the
less mobile sources of income. In the case of Lebanon, employment, business, and rental income could
be combined and subject to a single progressive rate schedule. Capital gains, dividends, and interest
could be subject to a lower flat rate. Moreover, Lebanon’s profit tax rate is low when compared with other
countries in and outside of the region, and thus offers potential for a moderate increase.
There is room to improve the special income tax regime for small businesses. The current criteria to
qualify for a special regime are too broad and should be revised. For example, currently there are
activities (e.g., insurance) and professions (e.g., doctors, engineers) for which taxable income is
calculated as a mark-up to turnover. The criterion to qualify for a simplified regime should be the ability to
produce books of account, which is more closely related to the scale of the business than its nature.
Thus, only businesses up to a specified turnover (e.g., the VAT registration threshold) should be allowed
to tax under a small taxpayer regime that establishes a presumed amount of profit as a specified
percentage of turnover (different percentages could be set for different activities to reflect differences in
business structures).
Existing property taxes have some attractive features but also drawbacks. Taxes on immobile
factors, of which land is the archetype, are generally more difficult to escape. However, the existing
registration fee has the disadvantage that it discourages buying/selling transactions in the real estate
market and encourages evasion through non-registration. The most appealing avenue to reform property
taxes in Lebanon is to improve the ability of authorities to enforce the current taxes. To improve the
enforcement of the current system, the registration fee and the (proposed) tax on capital gains could be
integrated. Integration could be accomplished (and revenue preserved) by allowing sellers of property a
(non-refundable) credit against capital gains tax equal to the registration fee.
Indirect Taxes
The VAT is a key pillar of the Lebanese tax system as it accounts for more than 30 percent of
total tax revenues. Around 70 percent of VAT revenues are collected at the border and the remaining
30 percent in the interior of the country. The standard VAT rate is relatively low compared to relevant
comparator countries in the region, but revenue productivity is relatively high.2

2

Revenue performance is usually compared by relying on VAT productivity which is usually measured as VAT revenue (in percent
of GDP) divided by the main VAT rate.

37

VAT Productivity

Standard VAT Rate
25
20
20

18

0.8
16

0.6

15
10

10

10

0.4

0.76
0.50
0.34

0.33

0.32

0.2

5

0.0

0
Morocco Tunisia Jordan
Source: IMF Staff.

Egypt Lebanon

Exemptions undermine the effectiveness and implementation of the VAT. The most peculiar feature
of the VAT in Lebanon is that many exempted activities (e.g., health, education, agriculture,
transportation) have the right to claim a refund for the VAT paid on inputs. While many countries exempt
these sectors from charging VAT on its output, it is much less common to exempt them from paying VAT
on its inputs. Reducing exemptions, including the ability of exempt activities to claim refunds, would help
broaden the VAT base and increase revenues.
With a broader VAT base and lower compliance gaps, an increase in the VAT rate would generate
more revenues and less distortions. Lebanon’s VAT rate is comparatively low, and thus a candidate to
be increased to generate additional revenues. However, such an increase would be more efficient and
revenue productive if coupled with the reduction of exemptions and measures to strengthen compliance.
Significant tax revenue gains could be achieved from increasing tax rates on alcohol and from
indexing specific excises tax rates. Lebanon levies excises taxes on alcohol, tobacco, cars, gasoline
and mobile telecommunications. With the exception of mobile telecommunications, this is in line with
international practices in developing countries. Excises on tobacco, cars, and gasoline are collected only
on imports, while excises on alcohol apply to both imports and domestic production. The revenue yield
of alcohol excises is insignificant mainly because tax rates are specific and were set in 1991 and
never revised upwards. The erosion by inflation is a vulnerability of specific tax rates and requires
periodic (i.e., once a year) indexation to protect the real revenue yield of specific excises taxes.
In sum, Lebanon’s tax pressure is moderate and an additional revenue effort appears warranted to
generate resources for critical infrastructure investments and debt reduction. The strategy to
mobilize additional revenues should weigh the implications of any tax measures on equity, the incentive
structure of the economy, and tax administration. Substantial revenue gains could be achieved in the
short-run through broadening the base of the VAT and the income tax, increasing a number of tax rates
that are relatively low by international standards, and implementing a number of other reforms that will
increase the coherence of the tax system and reduce the burden on tax administration.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LEBANON
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by Middle East and Central Asia Department
July 14, 2010

Contents

Page

Annexes
I. Fund Relations.................................................................................................... 2
II. World Bank-IMF Collaboration ............................................................................ 5
III. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................... 11

2

Annex I. Lebanon: Fund Relations
(As of May 31, 2010)
I.

Membership Status:

Joined 04/14/47; Article VIII (07/01/93).

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
203.00
260.29
18.83

Percent of Quota
100.00
128.22
9.28

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
193.29
209.37

Percent of Allocation
100.00
108.32

IV.

Use of Fund Resources
Lebanon’s outstanding credit to the IMF comes from two drawings under
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) in April 2007 and November
2008. The last EPCA assessment report was issued in November 2009.
Outstanding Purchases:
EPCA

V.
VI.

SDR Million
76.13

Percent of Quota
37.50

Latest Financial Arrangements: None
Projected Obligations to Fund:
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

12.69

25.38

25.38

12.69

0.00

0.45

0.66

0.31

0.11

0.00

13.14

26.03

25.69

12.79

0.00

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

Not Applicable

VIII.

Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): Not applicable

IX.

Safeguards Assessment:
Pursuant to Fund policy, the Banque du Liban (BdL) was subject to a full
safeguards assessment in conjunction with the first Emergency Post-Conflict
Assistance (EPCA). The 2008 safeguards assessment report proposed
several specific measures for enhancing the BdL’s financial reporting, audit,
and control procedures, and recommended an update of the central bank law.
An update safeguards assessment was completed in August 2009 in the

3

context of the second EPCA. The update noted progress achieved in
enhancing procedures for reserve management and external audit, but
recommended further actions to strengthen financial reporting transparency,
oversight, central bank legislation, and internal audit.
Nonfinancial Relations
X.

Exchange Arrangement
Lebanon has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in
1993 and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions. The exchange
arrangement, which maintains a de-facto peg to the U.S. $, is classified as
stabilized. Since October 1999, the BdL has intervened to keep the
pound around a mid-point parity of LL 1,507.5 per $1, with a bid-ask spread of
LL+/-6.5.

XI.

Article IV Consultation
The 2009 Article IV Consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on
April 15, 2009. At the time, Directors noted the remarkable resilience of the
Lebanese economy in the face of the global financial crisis. In addition, they
underscored the need for fiscal and structural reforms to address Lebanon’s
longstanding vulnerabilities, and for continued vigilance in bank regulation and
supervision to safeguard macrofinancial stability.

XII.

Financial Sector Assessment Program
Lebanon participated in the Financial Sector Assessment Program in 1999,
and the related report was presented to the Executive Board at the time of the
Article IV consultation (FO/DIS/99/113). A Financial System Stability
Assessment update was conducted in 2001, and the related report presented
to the Executive Board at the time of the Article IV consultation (SM/01/281).

XIII.

Resident Representative Office
Mr. Eric Mottu took his position as Resident Representative in Lebanon in
September 2009.

XIV.

Technical Assistance
Fiscal area—FAD has provided advice on introducing the VAT, reforming
customs tariffs and income taxes, strengthening tax and customs
administration, improving public expenditure management, and
consolidating fiscal accounts. A fiscal ROSC was published in May 2005.
During 2005–07, technical assistance focused on (i) consolidating fiscal
accounts; (ii) improving public liquidity management; (iii) identifying fiscal
reform priorities; (iv) reforming subsidies and restoring gasoline excises; and
(v) improving the budget preparation process. In 2008–09, FAD and the
Middle East Technical Assistance Center (METAC) provided targeted
follow-up support to ongoing initiatives in both tax administration and public

4

financial management (e.g., tax audit program, treasury single account, and
cash management). There were two FAD technical assistance missions in
2010 on (i) tax administration reforms; and (ii) tax policy options.
Considerable TA needs remain in budget preparation, fiscal management,
public accounting and reporting, tax and customs administration, including on
compliance and enforcement programs, and taxpayer segmentation. The
authorities would also benefit from technical assistance in establishing a risk
management framework for PPPs.
Financial area—Over the past few years, the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department has provided technical assistance in the areas of the payments
and settlements systems and vulnerability indicators. The related missions
undertook an assessment of compliance with Core Principles for Systemically
Important Payments Systems, advised on developing systems to improve the
efficiency and liquidity management of public sector payments and receipts,
and assisted in the elaboration of a framework for collecting and analyzing
macro-prudential indicators to develop capacity to monitor systemic financial
sector vulnerabilities. However, progress in implementing these
recommendations has been limited. In 2010, METAC provided training on
consolidated supervision, stress-testing techniques, and assessing banks’
business and strategic plans. Going forward, technical assistance should
focus on (i) strengthening supervision and regulation of banks’ cross-border
activities; and (ii) introducing an early warning system.
Statistical area—The Statistics Department has provided technical
assistance in national accounts, price and balance of payments statistics.
During 2007, several missions on the consumer price index (CPI)
were undertaken through the METAC. As a result, in March 2008 a
new monthly country-wide CPI was launched. Technical assistance in
building capacity for national accounts statistics and economic surveys was
provided through the resident advisor in real sector statistics. In March 2008,
METAC provided technical assistance on balance of payments and
international investment position statistics, and more recently, it provided
recommendations on improving work processes in the Statistics and
Economic Research Department of the BdL. In February 2010, a technical
assistance mission assessed the work processes at the BdL, focusing on
legal and institutional arrangements; human and technical resources; and
coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of statistics produced by the BdL.
Nevertheless, statistical gaps—including in quality, coverage, and timelines—
remain substantial, particularly in the areas of national accounts, wages,
employment, real estate, and the balance of payments statistics (see
Annex III). A stronger commitment to fill these gaps is needed for further
technical assistance to be effective.

5

Annex II. Lebanon: World Bank-IMF Collaboration
46.
The Lebanon teams of the Fund and the World Bank met on June 4, 2010,
to identify macrocritical structural reforms and to coordinate work of the two
teams for the period July 2010-June 2011.8 The teams agreed that Lebanon’s main
macroeconomic challenges are to reduce the very high government debt-to-GDP ratio
and to maintain stability of the financial sector. To meet these challenges, Lebanon
needs to achieve and maintain fiscal consolidation and strong growth over a number
of years, and maintain close vigilance in financial sector supervision.
47.
Based on this shared assessment, the teams identified seven structural
reform areas as macrocritical, in view of their central role in achieving fiscal
consolidation and sustained growth:

8



Electricity sector reform: Reduce budgetary transfers to the
electricity provider by (i) reducing the cost of production, including
through reducing reliance on expensive fuel oil, (ii) increasing revenue
collection, (iii) enhancing electricity supply by making necessary
investments and, (iv) gradually adjusting tariff towards cost recovery
levels, possibly in conjunction with transfers to poor households. These
measures should be accompanied by a comprehensive reform of the
regulatory and institutional framework. Electricity sector reform is
macrocritical because the presently very large budgetary transfers to
the sector undermine fiscal sustainability and insufficient electricity
supply weighs on growth.



Telecommunications sector reform: Reduce costs and enhance the
quality and scope of telecom services by making necessary
investments and implementing the regulatory framework needed for
increased private sector involvement. Telecommunications sector
reform is macrocritical because (i) the sector generates large revenues
for the government; (ii) sector reforms can lift the country’s growth
potential; and (iii) proceeds from licensing and/or privatization could be
used to repay part of the government’s large debt.



Public financial management reform: Lebanon’s public financial
management is compartmentalized and not very effective. Key
elements of a reform are: (i) establishing a macrofiscal unit in the
Ministry of Finance; completing the coverage of the Treasury Single
Account; strengthening expenditure programming, budget preparation,
aid and debt management, and coordination with the Central Bank

The IMF team was led by Mr. Bauer (mission chief) and the World Bank team by Mr. Ba (Country
Manager) and Hedi Larbi (Country Director).

6

(feasible in the short to medium term); and (iv) strengthening
accounting, payment, and auditing functions, including by introducing a
Government Financial Management Information System (feasible
in the longer term). These reforms are macrocritical because they will
help create fiscal space needed for fiscal consolidation and for higher
public investment and targeted social spending. The authorities’ plans
to enter into public-private partnerships (PPPs) could help address
infrastructure bottlenecks, but a sound institutional framework must be
put in place to control fiscal risks and maximize benefits.


Social services and safety net reform: Delivery of social services in
Lebanon and the social safety net are weak. The following reforms
would help: (i) health: rationalizing and expanding health insurance
coverage; (ii) education: improving the quality of public education
including strengthening higher education and vocational training;
(iii) pension systems: strengthening financial sustainability and
administration of the National Social Security Fund, and creating a new
pension system for private sector workers; and (iv) social safety nets:
improving the targeting to the most needy. These reforms are
macrocritical because better health and education services, stronger
pensions systems, and a more effective social safety are needed to
enhance the productivity of the workforce and strengthen growth
prospects, reduce inequalities and generate political support for the
needed fiscal consolidation.



Investment climate reform: Lebanon’s corporate sector is held back
by the extraordinarily high costs of doing business. High costs arise
mainly from weaknesses in governance, finance, power supply,
regulatory systems, and weak contract enforcement. Wide-ranging
reforms are needed to address these issues. They are macrocritical
because a more conducive investment climate is needed to maintain
strong growth.



Financial sector stability assessment: Given the large financial
sector and the high prevalence of dollarization, financial sector stability
is key for macroeconomic stability. Conducting a Financial System
Stability Assessment (FSSA) is macrocritical and desirable, because it
would help the authorities identify potential threats to financial sector
stability and provide suggestions for addressing them.



Reform of the statistical system: Lebanon’s statistical system suffers
from fragmentation and has limited ability to provide timely and reliable
data. Strengthening the statistical authorities is macrocritical because
timely and reliable data are needed to monitor economic and social
developments and to enable evidence-based decision making.

7

48.

The teams agreed the following division of labor:


Electricity sector reform: The Bank will continue to elaborate reform
options and discuss them with the authorities. In this context, the Bank
will draw on the recently completed “Electricity Strategic Plan”
prepared by the Ministry of Energy to focus its support on priority
measures to be taken soon by the government. The new Country
Partnership Strategy of the Bank includes technical and financial
support to the electricity sector to assist the government in
implementing its strategic plan.



Telecommunications sector reform: The Bank will support the
Government’s objective to structure the telecommunications sector in a
way that introduces competition, improves capacity and quality of
services, and reduces cost to consumers. The Bank Group will
continue providing advice to finalize the development of the
telecommunication sector strategy. An Institutional Development Fund
Grant will be mobilized to finance capacity building to the
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority. In addition, IFC Advisory
and Investment products could be leveraged to the extent the private
sector becomes part of the government’s strategy for telecom reform.
The Fund will lead work on taxation and broader implications of the
sector reform on the budget.



Public financial management reform: The Bank is providing
technical assistance (TA) on budget preparation and execution, debt
management, and aid coordination through the Emergency Fiscal
Management project (EFMIS). The project also includes macro-fiscal
projection and capacity building activities covering all four fields of TA.
The Fund is providing TA (via METAC), in close coordination with the
EFMIS program above, on (i) completing the coverage of the Treasury
Single Account and on cash management; and (ii) enhancing
consistency of budget classification and chart of accounts with the
GFSM 2001 and improving fiscal coverage. The Fund will also review
a recent TA request regarding payments decentralization. The Fund
and the Bank will work jointly to assist with establishing a sound
framework for PPPs, if requested by the authorities. The Fund will
assist in building capacity for assessing and containing fiscal risks,
while the Bank will lead in setting up a mechanism for competitive
bidding procedures and incentive-based regulation.



Social services and safety net reform: The Bank will continue its
analytical work in the area of social safety nets and provide a
prioritized list of policy recommendations, and is preparing the
poverty-targeting project. The Bank has already launched a cash
transfer pilot.

8



Investment climate reform: The Bank has completed the update of
its survey-based investment climate assessment in March 2010. This
update includes a list of policy recommendations. A national workshop
sponsored by the Prime Minister will be held before end-2010 to share
the results of the survey and agree on an action plan that the
government will implement to address the main binding constraints to
private sector development.



Financial sector stability assessment: The Bank and the Fund are
encouraging the authorities to consider an FSSA update. The update
would provide a prioritized list of recommendations for addressing any
threats to financial sector stability.



Reform of the statistical system: The Bank will continue to provide
TA on the preparation of social statistics, including in the areas of
health and education, with a focus on poverty analysis. The Bank will
assist the authorities in implementing a statistical master plan (SMP)
and reforming the legal framework for the statistical activity in
Lebanon. The Fund TA will continue to focus on national accounts,
monetary, price and balance of payments statistics.

49.
The teams have the following requests for information from their
counterparts:


The Fund team requests to be kept informed of progress in the Bank’s
work in the above macrocritical structural reform areas. Timing: when
milestones are reached (and at least semi-annually).



The Bank team requests to be kept informed of the Fund’s
assessments of macroeconomic policies and prospects, as well as of
Fund’s TA in the above reform areas. Timing: in the context of
Article IV Consultation and other missions (and at least semi-annually).



The table below lists the teams’ separate and joint work programs
during July 2010–June 2011.

9

Lebanon: Bank and Fund Planned Activities in Macrocritical Structural
Reform Areas, July 2010–June 2011
Title
1. Bank Work
Program

Products

Provisional Timing of
Missions

Expected Delivery Date

Country Assistance
Strategy.

Preparatory work is ongoing.

Board Discussion
expected in August 2010

Assistance to the
Electricity Sector

Possible investment lending
in support of the strategic
plan of the government.

Board discussion in
April 2011

Technical assistance on
public financial
management (budget
preparation, debt and aid
management).

Implementation of the TA
project started in May 2009.
Progress will be monitored
through the Bank’s semiannual supervision reports
and the authorities’ quarterly
progress reports.

Implementation through
September 2011

Analytical work, technical
assistance, and possibly
lending operations in the
area of social services
and social safety net
(including education,
health, and pensions
systems).

Ongoing.

Implementation throughout
FY2010–11

Sector work on social
safety net, gender,
health, energy, water and
environment

Work will be ongoing
throughout FY10. Over the
coming period, areas of focus
are: pensions; labor market
reform; technical assistance
for LNG and energy
efficiency; and continued
engagement in education,
health, water and
environment sectors.

Implementation throughout
FY2011–12

Survey-Based Investment
Climate Assessment
(ICA) Update.

Completed.

Draft report to government
in the second half of 2010

Program for Business
Environment Reforms

Initiation mission in
September 2010

Implementation throughout
FY2011–12

Foreign Inflows and
Broad Based Growth—
Impact of Policy Choices

Initiation mission in July 2010

Implementation throughout
FY2011

Statistics TA (social
statistics, poverty
analysis).

Ongoing.

Implementation throughout
FY2010–11

Assistance in
implementing the
statistical master plan

Initiation mission in
September 2010

Implementation throughout
FY2011–12

10

2. Fund Work
Program

Article IV Consultation

TA missions on:
- Tax Administration
- Tax Policy Options
- Public financial
management
- Statistics (national
accounts, BOP, PPI)
- Banking Supervision
3. Joint Work
Program

FSAP Update (tentative)

May-June 2010

July 2010

April 2010
April–May 2010

June 2010
June 2010

Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
TBD

TBD

11

ANNEX III. LEBANON—STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of July 2, 2010
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision has serious shortcomings that significantly hamper
surveillance. In particular, there are serious weaknesses in the compilation of data
on the national accounts, employment, general government and the rest of the
nonfinancial public sector, and balance of payments. There is no national data on
wages and real estate activity and prices. In addition, data on poverty and income
distribution is patchy, impairing social policy formulation. Raising the statistical
capacity in Lebanon to internationally accepted levels will require a firm commitment
from the government, including high-level support and the allocation of sufficient
resources to the Central Administration of Statistics (CAS).
National Accounts: The national accounts data are weak. Only annual data are
available, currently until 2008. National accounts statistics are still being produced
by a team in the Prime Minister’s office with some bilateral support, using mostly
administrative data sources and compilation methods that do not conform to best
practices. The transfer of national accounts statistics compilation to the CAS and the
launch of comprehensive economic surveys have been repeatedly delayed, but are
now scheduled to take place in 2011. Maintaining this timetable will be an important
step toward improving the quality of the national accounts statistics. STA is currently
assisting the CAS in building capacity to produce national accounts estimates based
on a sound methodology and a comprehensive data collection program. Work is
underway to incorporate the 2004 economic survey data into the national accounts
estimates.
Price statistics: Since May 2008, the CAS compiles and disseminates a monthly
Consumer Price Index (CPI) following internationally accepted methodology. The
CPI is disseminated within three weeks after the end of the reference month.
Geographical coverage is expanded to include all areas in Lebanon (a previous CAS
index was based on prices collected from Beirut and its suburbs). Staff has adopted
the new CAS index as the primary CPI for Lebanon since 2009. There is a need to
develop regular and timely statistics on producer prices, wages, and real estate
prices. A METAC mission is scheduled for July 2010 to assist the CAS in compiling
a producer price index.
Government finance statistics: The coverage of government finance statistics is
not comprehensive. The dissemination of central government finance statistics has
improved markedly in recent years. However, published monthly data on the central
government budgetary accounts does not cover widespread extra-budgetary
activities conducted by public entities, omit certain transfers, financing data,
foreign-financed capital expenditure, and arrears. Certain (treasury) spending is only

12

identified ex-post, and its economic classification with a lag. However, these items
are provided to the staff in the context of surveillance activities. Government finance
statistics are on a cash basis, with a modified cash-basis for budgetary expenditure
data, corresponding to the issue of payment orders.
Monetary and financial statistics: Monetary statistics are adequate. At the same
time, sectoralization of institutional units and classification of financial instruments in
the data reported to STA fall short of what is needed for compilation of Standardized
Report Forms (SRFs). The reporting of monetary data to STA is irregular and
occurs with a three- to four-month lag, though the MCD country team receives it on a
timely basis. Reflecting in part restrictions imposed by domestic legislation, the
Banque du Liban (BDL) does not publish externally audited financial statements and
its reporting practices are not yet fully compliant with the IFRS. The lack of a reliable
classification of deposits by residency complicates the balance of payments
analysis.
Balance of payments: Balance of payments statistics are weak. The data reflect
deficiencies in the current account (unrecorded exports, uncertainty with respect to
the estimates of private sector services and workers’ remittances, irregularities in the
income account), the capital account (grants), and the financial account (foreign
direct investment, equity investment in the nonbank private sector, and corporate
borrowing abroad).. The BdL is in the process of implementing new FDI survey
forms and amending reporting requirements for banks and non-banks to include
more comprehensive and detailed breakdown of BOP components. Lack of effective
interagency cooperation and staff constraints at both the BdL and CAS are among
the main factors impeding progress.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Participant in the General Data
Dissemination System since January 2003.
Metadata and the plans for improving the
real and fiscal statistics need to be
updated.

No data ROSC is available.

13

Lebanon: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of June 15, 2010
Date of
Latest
Observation

Date
Received

Frequency
of
8
Data

Frequency of
8
Reporting

Frequency of
8
Publication

Exchange Rates

06/14/10

06/15/10

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary
1
Authorities

04/2010

05/2010

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

04/2010

05/2010

M

M

M

Broad Money

04/2010

06/2010

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

04/2010

05/2010

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

04/2010

06/2010

M

M

M

Interest Rates2

6/2010

06/2010

W/M

W/M

W/M

Interest Rates3

04/2010

06/2010

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

04/2010

05/2010

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
4
and Composition of Financing –
5
General Government

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
4
and Composition of Financing –
Central Government

03/2010

05/2010

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and
Central Government-Guaranteed
6
Debt

03/2010

04/2010

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

Q4/2009

05/2010

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

Q4/2009

05/2010

Q

Q

Q

2008

4/2010

A

A

A

12/2009

03/2010

M

M

M

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt7
International Investment Position
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined policy interest rates (including discount rates, rates on treasury
bills, notes and bonds).
3
Market interest rates (including average deposit and lending rates in Lebanese pounds and U.S. dollar).
4
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
5
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and
social security funds) and state and local governments.
6
Including currency and maturity composition.
7
Staff estimate based on public external debt, non-resident deposits, and claims of the BIS banks on
nonfinancial private sector.
8
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); or Not Available (NA).
2

Statement by the Staff Representative on Lebanon
Executive Board Meeting
July 30, 2010
1.
This statement reports on most recent developments and their impact on the
economic outlook. It complements information contained in the staff report for the 2010
Article IV Consultation (SM/10/199), issued on July 15, 2010, and does not change the thrust
of the staff appraisal.
2.
Information has become available regarding some modifications that were
introduced to the draft 2010 budget prior to its approval in cabinet and submission to
Parliament. The proposed asset revaluation tax was dropped and some minor expenditure
increases were added. With this, full implementation of the 2010 budget would imply a
primary balance close to zero (instead of a 0.5 percent of GDP surplus, as noted in the staff
report). These developments notwithstanding, staff continues to advise the authorities to
target a primary balance of at least 2 percent of GDP, which could be achieved by cautiously
implementing the budget and saving any revenue overperformance.
3.
The primary balance of the government in the first four months of 2010 reached
a surplus of about 1 percent of GDP, more than three times the level achieved in the
same period of 2009. The surplus reflects substantial tax revenue increases (+16 percent
year-on-year) and lower transfers to Electricité du Liban. Available data indicates that fiscal
performance remained strong in May, suggesting that the primary balance floor of 2 percent
of GDP recommended by staff for the full year is within reach.
4.
Other recent economic data releases have been broadly consistent with the 2010
projections presented in the staff report.


Inflation. CPI inflation dropped to 3.5 percent year-on-year in June (May: 4.9 percent),
helped by lower energy prices.



Monetary developments. Following a period of substantial moderation, deposit
growth picked up in the first half of July, increasing by $1.3 billion (1.3 percent).
With sizeable deposit inflows, international reserves (excluding gold) reached around
$29.7 billion in mid-July, an increase of nearly $400 million since end-June. Staff
remains of the view that the authorities should maintain a pause in the interest
reduction cycle to allow pass-through of earlier policy interest cuts. However, if
strong deposit growth persists in the coming weeks, there could be room for a further
gradual reduction in policy rates.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/139
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 8, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with Lebanon
On July 30, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Lebanon.1
Background
Lebanon’s economy performed remarkably well during the global financial crisis. The
economy benefited from a confidence rebound following the political reconciliation
agreement reached in Doha in 2008 and the successful formation of a national unity
government in 2009. Backed by buoyant activity in construction, tourism, commerce,
and financial services, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 9 percent last year.
With momentum carrying into 2010, growth is now expected to reach at least 8 percent
this year. Inflation has risen since late 2009, driven partly by fuel prices. Price pressures
in the non-tradable sector have so far remained relatively contained, but could rise if the
economy accelerates further.
The banking sector has been resilient in the face of the global crisis, thanks to relatively
conservative funding and asset structures, and prudent banking regulations and

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2

supervision. Banks remain profitable, well-capitalized, and highly liquid, with adequate
provisions and declining non performing loans (NPL) ratios. Commercial bank deposits
surged by 23 percent in 2009 and deposit dollarization dropped below 64 percent,
driven by high domestic interest rates and the decline in political and security risks.
Following a series of interest rates cuts, deposit inflows have moderated in recent
months, but are still growing at a healthy annualized rate of about 11 percent. There has
been little fallout from the developments in Dubai and Southern Europe, with Lebanon’s
sovereign spreads moving broadly in line with the emerging market average.
Macroeconomic policies have been strong, but structural reforms have remained stalled.
Abundant capital inflows allowed the Banque du Liban to raise international reserves to
record levels (over $29 billion). Buoyant revenues, boosted by growth and the
reintroduction of gasoline excises, and spending discipline raised the fiscal primary
surplus to 3 percent of GDP in 2009. As a result, the government debt-to-GDP ratio
declined by 9 percentage points to 148 percent of GDP in 2009. However, little headway
has been made on critical structural reforms, including addressing the loss-making
electricity sector, raising the value added tax (VAT) rate, eliminating extra-budgetary
funds, and overhauling the budget process.
Despite the economy’s impressive resilience to the crisis, Lebanon continues to suffer
from high underlying vulnerabilities. Domestic stability rests on the fragile political
system split along confessional lines, and the country lies at the crossroads of regional
tensions. The government’s debt remains among the highest in the world, and almost
half of it is denominated in foreign currency. The large banking system depends on
short-term deposit inflows from nonresidents to roll over its large exposure to the
sovereign. With high loan dollarization, banks carry significant exposure to unhedged
borrowers.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed Lebanon’s strong economic and financial performance
during the global recession and commended the authorities for prudent macroeconomic
management and financial sector oversight. While noting progress in reducing
short-term risks, Directors cautioned that the underlying vulnerabilities remain large.
Directors advised to manage the buoyant economy cautiously to avoid overheating and
to prevent the build-up of new vulnerabilities. They emphasized the need to address the
high government debt and to implement growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Directors supported the authorities’ intention to increase capital spending to address
growing infrastructure gaps, but cautioned against a substantial fiscal relaxation given
the booming economy. They encouraged the authorities to execute current spending

3

prudently and to save revenue over-performance with the objective of achieving a larger
primary surplus in 2010.
Directors agreed that a further reduction in the government debt-to-GDP ratio remains
the top medium-term policy priority. Lowering the debt burden, while maintaining
permanently higher investment and social spending will require a combination of
expenditure rationalization and socially balanced tax measures. Directors encouraged
the authorities to reduce budgetary transfers to the electricity sector and consider tax
measures, including income tax reform and broadening of the VAT.
Directors recognized the challenges the authorities have faced in managing large capital
inflows, and agreed that Lebanon’s vulnerabilities and exposure to shocks require a
strong international reserves position. They welcomed the buildup of reserves that took
place over the past two years. Directors recommended that the authorities carefully
assess the pace of reserve accumulation, paying due regard to the need to continue to
ensure confidence, while considering the costs of sterilization. In this context, Directors
supported the recent policy interest rate reductions that moderated the pace of deposit
inflows. Looking forward, Directors concurred that a pause in interest rate reduction
would be advised given the imperfect policy transmission mechanism and uncertain lags
in Lebanon.
Directors welcomed that Lebanon’s banks have weathered the global crisis well. They
called for continued vigilance, with a focus on preventing excessive risk-taking as high
liquidity and declining interest rates are leading banks to increase private sector credit
and expand their activity.
To underpin the medium-term fiscal strategy and growth, Directors encouraged the
authorities to take the opportunity of the positive economic environment to implement
structural reforms, including modernizing tax administration and public financial
management, and reforming the electricity, water, and telecommunications sectors.
Directors also underscored the importance of strengthening the Banque du Liban’s
balance sheet.
Directors noted remaining weaknesses in the availability, quality, and timeliness of
economic data, and urged the authorities to take bold steps to improve Lebanon’s
statistical system.

4

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2010 Article IV Consultation with Lebanon is also available.

5

Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–09
Prel.
2007
Output and prices

2008

2009

(Annual percentage change)

(Annual percentage changeReal GDP (market prices)

7.5

9.3

9.0

GDP deflator

3.9

9.3

5.8

Consumer prices (period average) 1

4.1

10.8

1.2

Central government finances (cash basis)

(In percent of GDP)

Revenue (including grants)

24.0

23.8

24.6

Expenditure

34.9

33.4

32.7
-8.1

Budget balance (including grants)

-10.8

-9.6

Primary balance (including grants)

1.7

1.4

3.0

Total government debt

168

157

148

Monetary sector

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise)

Credit to the private sector
Broad money

2

15.8

18.5

15.1

10.9

15.5

23.2

5.2

5.2

5.0

8.7

8.6

7.6

Interest rates (period average, in percent)
Three-month treasury bill yield
Two-year treasury bill yield
External sector

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Exports of goods (in US$, percentage change)

26.8

29.1

-10.2

Imports of goods (in US$, percentage change)

27.6

36.3

-2.3

Current account (excluding official transfers)

-7.6

-9.7

-9.7

Foreign direct investment

7.5

8.8

10.7

Total external debt 3

194

172

171

11.5

18.8

27.4

29.7

45.7

55.2

17.1

24.1

28.6

Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)

25.1

29.9

34.5

Commercial bank total assets

328

315

334

1507.5

1507.5

1507.5

-1.0

-3.0

7.1

1454

1182

1566

493

794

293

Gross reserves (excluding gold), in billions of U.S. dollars
In percent of short-term external debt

4

In percent of total banking system deposits
Memorandum items:

Local currency per U.S. dollar (period average)
Real effective exchange rate (annual average, percent change)
Stock market index
EMBI Global - Lebanon (spread; basis points)

Sources: Lebanese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
Through 2008: based on the CPI index by Consultation and Research Institute; from 2009: based on the CPI index
by Central Administration of Statistics.
2
Defined as currency in circulation plus resident and non-resident deposits.
3
Includes non-resident deposits.
4
Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis, including short-term non-resident deposits.
1

Statement by Mr. Shaalan on Lebanon
Executive Board Meeting
July 30, 2010
1.
On behalf of the Lebanese authorities, I would like to thank staff for the valuable and
constructive discussions during the mission, including the useful exchange of views on key
issues topical to Lebanon at this time. The authorities also wish to express their appreciation
for the continued provision of timely and effective technical assistance.
Recent Developments and Outlook
2.
Regained domestic political stability and improved regional conditions, as well as
prudent macroeconomic policies and continued capital inflows, all contributed to the
remarkable performance of the Lebanese economy during the global financial crisis. Real
GDP growth averaged about 9 percent since 2008, one of the highest in the region, driven by
construction, tourism, trade, and financial services. Inflation remained under control,
although it has risen above the 2009 average, partly on account of fuel prices. Moreover, the
authorities made further progress toward fiscal consolidation, as evidenced by the steady
decline in the overall fiscal deficit. As a result, gross public debt-to-GDP is projected to
reach 139 percent at end‒2010 after peaking at 180 percent at end‒2006. Deposit inflows
continued to increase at a rapid pace―despite some moderation in recent months―deposit
dollarization declined, and the Banque du Liban (BdL) accumulated significant international
reserves. Moody's upgrade of Lebanon's sovereign ratings in April 2010 reflects these
favorable developments.
3.
The authorities’ policy objective in the near term is to prevent the economy from
overheating. They are well aware that vulnerabilities remain, notwithstanding the economy’s
strong performance. These vulnerabilities pertain to the fragile domestic and regional
political environment, the high public debt-to-GDP ratio, and large gross public financing
requirements which carry important rollover risks. To minimize the possible impact of the
aforementioned risks and pave the way for stable and sustained growth, the authorities are
committed to take advantage of the current favorable environment to address infrastructure
bottlenecks and decisively reduce public debt over the medium term.

2
Fiscal Policy and Reforms
4.
The draft budget for 2010, currently being discussed in parliament, aims at balancing
essential spending needs with stability goals. It envisages a significant increase in capital
spending—which will remain low in comparison with other countries in the region—to
address pressing infrastructure bottlenecks, notably in electricity generation which has lagged
far behind demand. Part of the increase in spending will be offset by revenue measures,
including a 2 percentage point increase in the tax on interest income and higher registration
fees for high-end properties. Taking account of the delayed implementation of the budget and
given the higher than forecast revenue performance this year, the decline in the primary
surplus is likely to be limited to about 1 ½ percentage points of GDP in 2010. The authorities
view the relaxation of the budget as temporary, and they remain fully committed to fiscal
consolidation and debt reduction in the medium term.
5.
Further progress has been made in the area of budgetary reforms, notably with regard
to public financial management with the provision in the 2010 draft budget law to cast future
budgets in a multi-year framework. Moreover, further to the introduction of transparent
reporting through the issuance of the Quarterly Debt and Debt Markets’ report since Q2 2007,
the Ministry of Finance is enhancing its debt management capacity by preparing a decree to
activate the debt management unit.
6.
Banks remain very liquid despite the slowdown in deposit growth in recent months.
Accordingly, the government expects to meet its 2010 financing needs from the market. It
intends, in close coordination with the BdL, to gradually lengthen the maturity profile and
lower the foreign currency share of government debt, which has declined over the past few
years (Tables 4 and 10). In doing so, due consideration will be given to preserving an
adequate level of international reserves.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
7.
The monetary policy framework has helped to bolster confidence in the Lebanese
financial system. The exchange rate peg continues to serve the economy well by providing a
firm anchor for financial stability. At the same time, the level of international reserves
preserves confidence in a country with underlying vulnerabilities, an open capital account,
and a fixed exchange rate. In line with the intention that was expressed during the previous
Article IV Consultation discussion, the authorities have markedly reduced policy interest
rates (by more than 400 basis points since mid-2008 on 5-year Treasury-bills/BdL
Certificates of Deposit) as market conditions became more predictable. This reduction
resulted in a significant slowdown in deposit growth. Given the imperfect monetary
transmission mechanism with uncertain lags in Lebanon, the authorities fully concur with
staff that a pause in policy interest rate reductions is warranted.

3
8.
The authorities appreciate staff’s analysis regarding the merits and costs of further
reserve accumulation. Nonetheless, the message on the relatively low “insurance” value of
additional coverage and high associated sterilization costs ought to be interpreted with
caution. While reserve holdings entail an opportunity cost, the model-based approaches
outlined in Appendix 2 do not fully account for the positive confidence effects related to
holding reserves. These were made clear during several crisis episodes during 1993-2009.
Moreover, Lebanon’s ratio of reserves-to-broad money—at about 28 percent in 2009—was
below the emerging market median of 33 percent.1 Finally, the reserve coverage of
short-term external debt, currently at 56 percent, remains well-below the 100 percent
Greenspan-Guidotti threshold, and the 153 percent median for emerging countries.2 With
potentially volatile non-resident deposits accounting for three quarters of short-term external
debt, the country could be subject to rapid shifts in risk appetite during times of turbulence.
Banking Sector
9.
Effective banking regulation and supervision, coupled with conservative bank
funding and asset structures, have shielded the domestic financial sector from the global
turmoil. At the same time, conservative prudential regulations on leverage and limited bank
exposure to real estate, have protected banks from potential effervescence in the real estate
market. In this regard, staff found little speculation in the real estate market, and developers
generally use low leverage in their projects.
10.
High liquidity and declining interest rates have led banks to increase private sector
credit and expand their businesses in the region over the past few years. Bank regulation and
supervision have particularly focused on preventing excessive risk taking in this regard. The
BdL and the Banking Control Commission have indeed reinforced cross-border supervision
and measures aimed at strengthening the oversight of Lebanese affiliates abroad, as detailed
in Box 4 of the staff report.
Structural Reforms
11.
The authorities are fully aware of the importance of structural reforms to create the
conditions for sustainable growth. They have identified priority focus areas in which
immediate reform and investments will help address the pressing needs of the population.
These areas include electricity, water, telecoms, urban transport, local development,
environment, public education, and social protection. The authorities believe that early
successes with these actions will create favorable social and political space for building

1

SM/10/166, June 30, 2010.

2

EBS/10/146, July 16, 2010.

4
consensus on deeper and more difficult reforms in these sectors that are essential for
sustainable growth.
12.
Electricity sector reform ranks high on the authorities’ agenda in view of the large
budgetary transfers to the sector. The authorities have developed with World Bank support an
electricity sector policy note, which was endorsed by the Cabinet in June 2010. The note
includes an action plan to improve the performance of the sector and to lay the foundation for
financial sustainability. The World Bank’s new Country Partnership Strategy will provide
technical and financial support to help the government implement its electricity sector
strategy, and the authorities plan to mobilize concessional donor support for it.

