September 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/270

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

Januaryxdfg 29, 2001
January 29, 2001

August 25, 2010
January 29, 2001
January 29, 2001

Republic of Korea: Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice
on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for the
Republic of Korea
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the Article IV consultation with the Republic of
Korea, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 6, 2010, with the officials of the Republic of Korea
on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on August 3, 2010. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its August 25, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.



A statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Korea.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

August 3, 2010

Republic of Korea: Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation1
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2010 Consultation with the Republic of Korea
Approved by Mahmood Pradhan and Aasim Husain

Key Issues and Recommendations:


Growth prospects: Growth is projected to recover to 6.1 percent in 2010, led by fixed
investment and restocking, and ease to 4½ percent next year. Downside risks relate to the
global economic and financial outlook, including a further escalation of the turmoil in southern
Europe and a worsening of geopolitical tensions in the Korean peninsula. These are balanced by
the potentially faster rebound in domestic demand.
 Achieving a smooth transition to private sector-led growth: Given the significant fiscal
withdrawal in 2010, the ongoing front-loading of spending will help smooth the transition to
private sector-led growth. With the output gap closing rapidly and policy rates well below
neutral, monetary accommodation should continue to be gradually withdrawn. If sovereign
concerns in Europe result in adverse spillovers on Korea, an adjustment of macroeconomic
policies may be called for.
 Enhancing macrofinancial policy frameworks: The authorities’ are encouraged to provide
details on the medium-term fiscal consolidation measures and further formalize the
medium-term fiscal framework. The Bank of Korea (BOK) could allow asset prices to play a larger
role in determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. Under current arrangements, there
is also scope to formalize the coordination among agencies responsible for financial stability to
better internalize macrofinancial linkages.
 Safeguarding financial stability: The authorities have taken pre-emptive measures to reduce
vulnerabilities associated with wholesale funding and short-term external bank debt. Regulatory
and supervisory frameworks may need to be tightened further, consistent with future global
changes, to prevent regulatory arbitrage.
 Diversifying sources of growth: Policies should focus on strengthening the nontradables sector.
This would sustain growth in the face of moderating export growth to advanced economies and
mitigate vulnerabilities to external demand shocks. Measures should aim at restructuring the
highly indebted small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), increasing competition in services,
and raising labor market flexibility.
___________________
1

Discussions took place in Seoul from June 23–July 6, 2010. The staff team comprised Messrs. Lall (head), Eskesen and
Zeng, and Ms. Karasulu (all APD). Approved by Mahmood Pradhan and Aasim Husain.

2

Contents

Page

I.

Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 3

II.

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ............................................................................. 3
A.
Recovery from the Crisis––Back to the Future ................................................................... 3
B.
Outlook and Risks––Ignition of the Private Engine of Growth ........................................... 7

III.

Policy Theme #1––Managing the Transition to Private-Led Growth ........................................... 9

IV

Policy Theme #2: Securing Economic Resilience and Sustainable Growth ................................ 13
A.
Enhancing Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks ............................................................... 14
B.
Safeguarding Financial Sector Stability ............................................................................. 18
C.
Product and Labor Market Policies––Diversifying the Sources of Growth....................... 20

V.

Staff Appraisal............................................................................................................................. 22

Boxes
1.
Korea: Potential Spillovers from the Crisis in Greece ................................................................... 8
2.
Time for Monetary Policy Normalization in Korea? ................................................................... 12
3.
A Role for Asset Prices in Korea’s Monetary Policy Framework? ............................................... 17
Figures
1.
The Rebound................................................................................................................................. 4
2.
Monetary and Financial Market Conditions ................................................................................. 5
3.
Current Policy Settings................................................................................................................ 10
Tables
1.
Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–11 ..................................................................................... 24
2.
Balance of Payments, 2005–10 .................................................................................................. 25
3.
Consolidated Central Government Operations, 2005–11 .......................................................... 26
4.
Medium-Term Projections, 2007–15 .......................................................................................... 27
5.
Financial Soundness Indicators, 2003–09................................................................................... 28
6.
Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 2005–10 ...................................................... 29

3

I. INTRODUCTION
1.

The Korean economy has staged an
impressive recovery over the past year. The
“Great Recession” had a large impact on
Korea’s open economy through collapsing
exports and massive capital outflows. The
authorities responded with decisive policy
measures to cushion the adverse spillovers to
the Korean economy and financial system.
This helped avoid a deeper slump and sowed
the seeds for the subsequent strong rebound
in activity.

2.

It is now time to exit from supportive
policies and design a strategy to sustain
growth and enhance economic resilience
over the medium term. Over the near term,

the recovery is expected to firm, paving the
way for the exit from supportive policies.
Moreover, the “Great Recession” has
informed the debate on the appropriate
design of macroeconomic policy frameworks,
the nature of macro-financial linkages, and
ways to further strengthen supervisory and
regulatory frameworks. It also underscored
Korea’s exposure to external shocks. With a
robust recovery now underway, this is a good
opportunity to reflect on the lessons from the
recent crisis and formulate an appropriate
medium-term policy strategy to sustain
growth and bolster the economy’s resilience
to future shocks.

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
A. The Recovery from the Crisis—Back to the Future
3.

Growth has rebounded impressively
since the recession in the second half of 2008
(Figure 1). Following the collapse in economic
activity in the fourth quarter of 2008
(-16.8 percent q/q seasonally-adjusted
annualized rate (SAAR)), the subsequent
recovery has solidified with GDP growth
averaging 7.4 percent (q/q SAAR) in the first
half of 2010. Moreover, the recovery is
increasingly being driven by private sector
demand, in particular fixed investment and a
slowdown in destocking. This rebound owes
to a number of factors, including a proactive
policy response and the normalization in
global trade. Monetary policy rates were cut
by 325 basis points between October 2008
and February 2009 and fiscal policy eased
significantly (an estimated fiscal impulse of
2¼ percent in 2009), against the backdrop of
strong underlying public finances. Moreover,

Korea’s export-dependent economy benefited
greatly from the rapid rebound in
international trade, partly led by the turning
of the global inventory cycle, and the initial
steep depreciation of the won. Finally, the
healthy balance sheet positions of banks and
large corporates made them resilient to the
downturn.

4.

Despite the recovery and strong capital
inflows, inflation pressures and asset
valuations remain contained (Figure 2).


Consumer prices: There are no signs yet
of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations remain well anchored as
reflected in consensus forecasts.
However, both headline and core
inflation have trended up in recent
months to 2.6 and 1.7 percent,

4

Figure 1. Korea—The Rebound
The rebound in economic activity has been impressive, and
is increasingly led by private domestic demand.

It has been supported by a 325 bps cut in monetary policy
rates, substantial global fiscal stimulus,...

…the normalization of trade,…

…the turning of the inventory cycle,...

…strong capital inflows,...

...and the strong balance sheets of the government, large
corporates, and banks.

5

Figure 2. Korea—Monetary and Financial Market Conditions
The rebound has not yet manifested itself in inflation
pressures.

Moreover, the momentum in house price growth has slowed
recently, especially in select areas of Seoul, while…

… strong capital inflows have boosted equity prices,
although the crisis in southern Europe and tensions with
North Korea have led to recent declines.

Equity prices have also risen relative to actual earnings
since late 2008, reflecting the optimistic outlook for profit
growth.

Financial market conditions have also normalized, although
the recent turmoil has led to an uptick in risk premia.

However, the credit cycle has not turned at this stage as
banks remain cautious and in response to prudential
tightening of mortgage lending last year.

6

respectively, in July from 2.3 and
1.5 percent, respectively, in March.
Nevertheless, headline inflation
remains well within the BOK’s inflation
target range of 3 ±1 percent.


the country as a whole, however, they
are only up by around 3 percent (y/y) so
far. Also, the momentum has slowed in
recent months, partly in response to
the introduction of prudential measures
last year. Nationwide house prices do
not appear to be out of line with
fundamentals (income, interest rates),
but the large overhang of unsold
properties is likely to limit the upside.

Equity and bond prices: With Korea and
other Asian economies leading the
global economic recovery, capital
inflows have rebounded. Renewed
investor risk appetite and ample
liquidity in the advanced economies
have amplified this trend. In Korea,
capital inflows have mainly been
concentrated in portfolio investments,
boosting equity prices. The KOSPI Index
has surpassed pre-crisis levels and is at
multi-year highs relative to current
earnings, despite the recent correction
following the onset of the European
sovereign debt crisis. Nevertheless, the
recovery is not out of line with that
experienced after the Asian crisis. Bond
markets too have benefited from
capital inflows and yields remain low.

Housing Prices and Income
120
Housing price appreciaion (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
Korea
(2000-2009)

Korea: Seoul
(2000-2009)

Hong Kong
(2000-2009)

Singapore
(2000-2009)

5.

While financial market conditions have
largely normalized, the credit cycle has not
yet turned as banks remain cautious about
lending (Figure 2).

Recovery of Stock Market (KOSPI) from Crisis 1/
140
Current crisis
120

Income growth (%)

1997-8 Asian Crisis

100



80
60
40
20

1/ Pre-crisis peak = 100.



Property prices: House prices have risen
from their lows in early 2009,
particularly in select areas of Seoul. For

p+30

p+28

p+26

p+24

p+22

p+20

p+18

p+16

p+14

p+12

p+8

p+10

p+6

p+4

P

p+2

P-2

P-4

P-6

0

Financial market strains: Measures of
financial market strains have largely
normalized since the height of the
global financial crisis. Credit spreads
and volatility (actual and option
implied) are back to—and in some cases
below—pre-crisis levels. However, the
onset of the recent sovereign debt crisis
in Europe has led to renewed risk
aversion among investors and some
uptick in risk premia as well as elevated
exchange rate volatility.

7


deposit limits and the tightening of
prudential regulations for mortgages
last year, aimed at quelling the earlier
acceleration in housing prices.

Credit market conditions: Credit to the
private sector has decelerated, led by a
slowdown in lending to SMEs and
households. In part, this reflects that
banks are adjusting to new loan-to-

B. Outlook and Risks—Ignition of the Private Engine of Growth
Staff’s Views

6.

The economic recovery is projected to
be increasingly driven by autonomous
private sector demand. Growth is projected
to rise to 6.1 percent in 2010 and ease to
4½ percent in 2011, partly due to base effects
and the exit from supportive policies. The
recovery is expected to be led by the rebound
in fixed investment and the turning of the
inventory cycle. Private consumption is also
expected to strengthen, although it will be
constrained by the usual lagged response of
the labor market during upturns and
relatively high household indebtedness. The
public sector is expected to contribute
negatively to growth as fiscal stimulus is
withdrawn this and next year (see below).
With the strengthening of private demand,
the contribution of net exports is expected to
be lower.

7.

Near-term risks are broadly balanced
at the moment. Downside risks relate to the
global economic and financial outlook,
including a further escalation of the turmoil in
southern Europe or worsening geopolitical
tensions in the Korean peninsula. These are
balanced by the potentially faster recovery in
domestic investment and inventories. Should

the risks from an escalation of the sovereign
debt crisis in Europe materialize (Box 1),
Korea would be vulnerable to a squeeze in
foreign currency liquidity if European banks
are forced to deleverage. The deleveraging
could also have broader implications for the
global economic outlook, which would
adversely affect Korea’s exports.

8.

Over the medium term, growth is
projected to settle below pre-crisis levels.
This reflects several factors: weaker export
demand from advanced economies as they
repair private and public balance sheets; the
rapid aging of the labor force; and, the high
indebtedness of Korean households and SMEs
(see below), which could constrain
consumption and investment. In addition,
raising productivity in the nontradable sector
(the second engine of growth) to the same
levels as in the export sector will likely be a
prolonged process, making it difficult to fully
offset the initial export- and aging-led decline
in potential growth. Moreover, increasing
productivity in the nontradable sector will
depend on the pace of implementation of
growth-enhancing structural reforms. The
overall slowdown in exports also depends on
Korean exporters’ ability to penetrate new
markets.

8

Box 1. Korea: Potential Spillovers from the Crisis in Greece 1
The intensification of the crisis in Greece has led to
a rise in risk premia for Korea-related exposures.
The won has weakened by about 7 percent against
the U.S. dollar since end-April and historical and
option implied FX volatility has ticked up. The
negative cross-currency swap spreads have
widened by more than 100 bps, but there are no
signs of severe dollar funding pressures at this
point. Risk premia on the Korean government and
banks have also risen, but are well below their late
2008 highs. However, these developments have so
far been mainly driven by the global rise in risk
premia, and more recently by the escalation of
tensions with North Korea, and not by Koreaspecific economic circumstances.

Korea due to increased loss provisioning or capital
requirements against their southern European
exposures.

While Korean banks’ direct exposure to Greece is
small, their funding structure does pose risks.
Korean banks’ direct exposure to Greece is
miniscule at $380 million out of total assets of
$1,315 billion. However, Korean banks still rely
relatively heavily on wholesale funding, despite a
decline since 2008, but only around 25 percent is
from foreign banks. Nevertheless, the large share
of external funding from European banks exposes
Korea to risks in the event the crisis in Greece
deepens and/or spills over to other countries with
weak fiscal positions. Since European banks have
large exposures to the countries seen as fiscally
vulnerable, they could be forced to cut back credit
lines to Korean banks or their foreign branches in

70

Potential sovereign risk contagion would appear
small, but the corporate sector faces relatively
large dollar-denominated rollover needs. Korea’s
fiscal position is strong and the size of external
government debt is relatively small at 4 percent of
GDP, suggesting they are not likely to be singled
out by nervous investors. However, corporate
dollar-denominated rollover needs are sizeable at
close to US$22 billion during Q2–Q4 2010,
although this is small relative to gross official
reserves of US$279 billion.
FX Refinancing Need of Corporations
(In billion of U.S. dollars)

Domestic Bank Whole Sale Funding and External Debt (US$ bn)
Total liabilities
o/w Whole sale funding
% of liabilities
o/w External debt
Short term
% of total external debt
% of total liabilities
Long term
% of total external debt

End-08

End-09

1283
413
32
97
43
43.9
3.4
54
56.1

1315
395
30
104
43
41.7
3.2
60
58.3

2010 Q2-Q4

3000

2011
60

2012

2500

Foreign Exchange Reserves (RHS)

50

2000

40
1500
30
1000

20

500

10

0

0
China

India

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Spillovers through the trade channel would also
appear manageable, unless the crisis leads to a
global economic slowdown. Less than 3 percent of
Korea’s exports are to southern Europe, while
Europe’s share is only around 15 percent.
However Korea also exports to Europe via China
and around 70 percent of Korea’s exports are
concentrated in highly cyclical medium- and hightech goods. Therefore, in the event the crisis
escalates and spills over to economic activity in
Europe at large and causes a depreciation of the
euro, Korean exports could suffer.
____________________
1

Prepared by Leif Lybecker Eskesen.

9
The Authorities’ Views

9.

The authorities broadly agreed with
staff’s assessment of the economic outlook.
The Ministry of Strategy and Finance (MOSF)
expects GDP to grow by 5.8 percent in 2010,
led by robust domestic demand and exports
amid a stronger-than-expected global
economic recovery. For 2011, the Ministry
forecasts growth of 5 percent. The BOK
forecast growth of 5.9 percent and
4.5 percent in 2010 and 2011, respectively.
Inflation is projected by BOK to pick up during
the second half of 2010, with average
inflation projected at 2.8 percent in 2010 and
3.4 percent in 2011.

10.

The authorities also shared staff’s
views about the risks to the economic
outlook. On the downside, they emphasized,
in particular, the potential spillovers from an
escalation of the sovereign debt crisis in
Europe. However, they concurred with staff
that the small direct exposure to the highly
indebted European countries through trade
and financial channels is unlikely to threaten
the recovery, unless broader deleveraging
and heightened risk aversion emerge. On the
upside, they saw scope for exports to
outperform despite the developments in
Europe given strong performance in other
markets, including China. For 2011, they
thought the margins of uncertainty were
higher.

III. POLICY THEME #1––MANAGING THE TRANSITION TO PRIVATE-LED GROWTH
Over the near term, the main policy challenge is to carefully manage the exit from accommodative
macroeconomic and financial sector policies while ensuring an orderly transition to a self-sustained
private sector-led recovery. At the same time, the authorities should stand ready to respond
appropriately in the event of a sharp rise in global risk aversion related to the stress in European
sovereign debt markets.
Background

11.

The 2010 budget implies significant
fiscal withdrawal relative to last year. The
2010 deficit is projected to decline to
1½ percent of GDP (excluding social security
funds) following a deficit of 4.1 percent of
GDP in 2009, primarily driven by the
nonrenewal of most stimulus measures.
While the budget remains supportive relative
to the 2007 pre-crisis baseline, it implies a
negative fiscal impulse of close to 2 percent of
GDP relative to 2009. Based on multipliers
derived from the IMF’s Global
Macroeconomic Fiscal and Monetary model,
this will subtract around 1 percentage point
from growth this year (Figure 3).

12.

Monetary policy remains highly
accommodative and the exchange rate is
well below pre-crisis levels. After maintaining
the policy rate at 2 percent since
February 2009, the BOK raised it by 25 bps in
July 2010. Most of the extraordinary liquidity
measures have meanwhile expired. With the
output gap expected to close before the end
of 2010 and the policy rate estimated to be
significantly below neutral, the monetary
stance is assessed to be highly
accommodative (Figure 3). Furthermore, the
real effective exchange rate is about
8 percent below pre-crisis levels and financial
conditions are also still accommodative.

10

Figure 3. Korea—Current Policy Settings
The 2010 budget implies significant fiscal withdrawal.

Impact of Fiscal Stimulus on 2010 Real GDP:
Multipliers Derived from GIMF Simulations
(Percentage deviation from baseline)

Monetary Policy Rate
(In percent)
6
Nominal

5

Real

4
3

0.5

2

0.0

1

-0.5

0

-1.0

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.0

Source: IMF staff estimates.

…in particular in light of the closing of the output gap later
this year and the likely increase in inflation pressures,.

Jul-10

Mar-10

May-10

Jan-10

Nov-09

Jul-09

Sep-09

May-09

Jan-09

Mar-09

Nov-08

Jul-08

ASEAN-4,
Hong Kong SAR,
and Singapore

Sep-08

China

May-08

Korea

Jan-08

-3

Japan

Mar-08

1.0

Impact from own stimulus
Impact accounting for stimulus in trading partner countries

However, monetary policy settings remain very
accommodative,…

Source: CEIC Data Company.

…which will raise the gap vis-à-vis the neutral rate in the
absence of further action.
Estimated Nominal Taylor Rule Rates
(In percent)
10

2010

9

2011

Latest policy rate

8
7
6
5
4
3
2

Source: CEIC Data Company Ltd. and staff estimates.

Despite the rapid appreciation since March 2009, the REER
remains well below pre-crisis levels.

Malaysia

New Zealand

Thailand

Korea

Australia

India

0

Indonesia

1

The exchange rate, consequently, remains undervalued
relative to its equilibrium level.
Real Effective Exchange Rate Undervaluation
(In percent)
0

0

-5

5

-10
-15

10

Undervaluation
Expected Appriciation in 5 years, Consensus (RHS)

15

-20

20

-25

25
Macro Balance

Source: CGER

External Stability

Equilibrium Exchange
Rate

11
13.

Most SME- support measures are
being gradually unwound, but many financial
sector support facilities remain in place. The
commercial bank guidance to rollover
maturing SME debt was not renewed in 2010.
Also, the maximum coverage of SME loan
guarantees was scaled back from 100 to
85 percent as of July this year for existing
loans under guarantee and to 50–85 percent
for new loans. While the government’s
guarantee of banks’ external debt expired at
end-2009, the W 20 trillion bank
recapitalization fund is still active, but has not
been used since early 2009 when eight banks
received capital support (W 3.9 trillion). Korea
Asset Management Corporation’s (KAMCO)
W 40 trillion facility for buying nonperforming
assets is also still in force, but utilization was
low at W 1.2 trillion. An additional
W 2½ trillion is planned for purchases in 2010
of construction-related nonperforming loans
from savings banks.
Staff’s Views

14.
To safeguard the private sector-led
recovery, the exit from supportive
macroeconomic policies should be carefully
calibrated. While the recovery is strong,
private sector growth is not likely to be fully
self-sustained until later in the year. Exit from
supportive macroeconomic policies is still
appropriate. However, the short transmission
lags of fiscal policy, including Korea’s ability to
quickly adjust fiscal policies, when weighed
against the longer lags of monetary policy,
suggest that the policy mix could have been
tilted more toward monetary tightening and
less toward fiscal withdrawal. Nevertheless,
the front-loading of the 2010 budget
spending will appropriately help smooth the
transition to private sector-led growth. For
2011, the authorities should aim for a
measured fiscal withdrawal as activity

exceeds potential, relying more on revenueraising measures given Korea’s narrow tax
bases by OECD standards. In the near term, it
would also be appropriate to raise policy
rates further after the welcome July hike
(Box 2). In this context, the MOSF may wish to
review its recent practice of attending
monetary policy meetings and voicing views
publicly on the appropriate monetary policy
stance. In line with best practices on
independent monetary policy frameworks in
other advanced economies, this would help
strengthen the credibility of the monetary
authorities.

15.

Exchange rate flexibility should also
be a key element of the policy mix. Despite
the 22 percent appreciation between
March 2009 and June 2010, the real effective
exchange rate remains undervalued according
to IMF’s Consultative Group on Exchange Rate
issues (Figure 3). The exchange rate should be
allowed to fully reflect supply and demand
conditions in the foreign exchange markets,
with interventions being strictly limited to
smoothing operations.

16.

With economic and financial
conditions normalizing, the scaling back of
SME and financial sector support should
continue. Staff welcomes the planned steps
to reduce the amount and coverage of SME
loan guarantees. However, the authorities are
urged to further reduce the coverage to
minimal levels for all loans over the medium
term. With financial conditions having
normalized since end-2008, the bank
recapitalization fund, the KAMCO fund and
other remaining financial sector support
measures can now be unwound without
threatening the recovery.

12

Box 2. Time for Monetary Policy Normalization in Korea?1
Asia’s faster-than-expected recovery has already
brought forward a gradual normalization of monetary
policy. Central banks in Australia, India, Malaysia and
Thailand have raised policy rates, fueling expectations
that central banks in other countries that are growing
robustly will follow suit in 2010. The analysis in this box
supports the case for gradually normalizing the policy
rate in Korea and suggests that the rate may have to be
raised relatively rapidly once the private-led recovery
has become fully self-sustained.
Why is it the right time to start normalizing the policy
rate in Korea? To address this question, one approach
is to estimate the “neutral” interest rate, consistent
with no output gap and stable inflation. The approach
applied here is based on the estimation of a structural
macroeconomic model for Korea. In the model, the real
neutral interest rate is determined by movements in
trend output, which is derived from a Ramsey-type
optimal growth model. The neutral rate also depends
on the risk premium because it has a bearing on
economy-wide borrowing costs, impacting the
monetary policy transmission mechanism. The main
findings are as follows:
 Output gap: The onset of the global crisis led to a
downward shift in the level of potential output in
Korea. However, actual GDP fell even further,
leading to a significant output gap in late 2008 and
early 2009. Despite a subsequent recovery in
potential output, the gap started to narrow rapidly
as the Korean economy rebounded from the crisis
and the gap is likely to close during the second half
of 2010. These developments are in line with the
experience of the Korean economy during the
Output Gap and Inflation Without Monetary Tightening
8

Neutral rate
Output Gap

6

Current Policy Rate
Inflation rate (core)



Asian financial crisis, when it took an average of 67 quarters for the output gap to close.
Neutral rate: The neutral interest rate declined
during the crisis, reflecting the decline in potential
output and the increase in the risk premium due to
the global financial turmoil. In total, the neutral
rate declined by about 100 basis points to 3½
percent, close to the historical low. As the recovery
firmed and financial markets stabilized, the neutral
rate has risen. Looking ahead, it is estimated to
rise another 75-100 basis points by 2011 as
potential output trends up and the risk premium
declines further with the normalization of
conditions in global financial markets. However, it
should be noted that the level of the neutral rate is
difficult to determine precisely, especially during
significant downturns impacting not only supply
and demand conditions but also the functioning of
credit markets.

The prevailing policy rate is well below the neutral
rate, reflecting the highly accommodative monetary
policy stance in Korea. At 2.25 percent, the current
policy rate is well below neutral; by around 200 basis
points from model-based estimates, which of course
have to be interpreted with caution. Moreover, in the
absence of further policy rate hikes or in the event of a
very gradual normalization, monetary conditions will
become even more accommodative as the neutral rate
rises further. Policy simulations show that a gradual
200 basis points rate hike, starting in Q3 2010, would
postpone the closing of the output gap until early 2011.
Impact of Monetary Tightening on Output Gap and Inflation
0.0
Output Gap

Inflation rate (core)

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

4

-2.0
-2.5

2

-3.0

0
-3.5

-2

-4.0

-4

-4.5
Mar-08

Sep-08

Mar-09

Sep-09

________________

-6
Mar-08

Sep-08

Mar-09

Sep-09

Mar-10

Sep-10

Mar-11

Sep-11

1

Prepared by Filiz Unsal.

Mar-10

Sep-10

Mar-11

Sep-11

13
17.

An escalation of the crisis in
southern Europe and worsening geopolitical
tension in the Korean peninsula could impact
the timing and pace of exit. The most
immediate fallout in both cases would be a
squeeze in foreign currency liquidity as
European banks and/or global investors scale
back their Korean exposures. In that case, the
BOK could use its ample reserves to provide
swaps and loans as substitutes for foreign
currency funding. In the event of a more
extreme outcome, swap lines with foreign
central banks may need to be reactivated. If
the crisis in Europe has implications for the
global economic outlook, and risks causing a
“second dip,” an adjustment of
macroeconomic policies may be called for.
However, if the sovereign debt crisis primarily
results in a gradual and sustained downward
shift in European growth due to fiscal
tightening, the appropriate policy response in
Korea would be structural reforms rather
than demand-management policies.

Employment Program,” (scaled back) SME
support, and other initiatives to smooth the
transition to fully private sector-led growth.
For 2011, they plan continued fiscal
withdrawal, mindful of the cyclical position of
the economy. As part of a carefully managed
exit strategy, the authorities believed that
monetary policy should remain
accommodative and not be tightened too
quickly given the lingering global economic
risks. In the event the crisis in Europe
escalates and has global economic
implications, the authorities stand ready to
take appropriate measures.

19.

The Authorities’ Views

The authorities shared staff’s view
that exchange rate flexibility is key to ensure
an appropriate policy mix. They noted that
the exchange rate depreciated rapidly when
the global crisis unfolded and subsequently
appreciated significantly with the recovery.
They stressed that the exchange rate is freely
determined in the market and that
interventions are limited to smoothing
operations.

18.

20.

The authorities agreed that it was
time to gradually scale back the supportive
policy measures, but that it should be done
in a cautious manner. While the 2010 budget
implies significant withdrawal of stimulus
relative to 2009, they underscored that it is
still expansionary relative to the pre-crisis
benchmark. This reflects the continuation of
priority support measures such as the “Hope

While SME support measures were
gradually being scaled back, some financial
support facilities are being retained for now.
While the authorities plan to take further
steps in coming years to scale back SME
support, they were reluctant to unwind
financial support measures, preferring to
keep them in place for now as a safety net
until downside risks had receded further.

IV. POLICY THEME #2––SECURING ECONOMIC RESILIENCE AND SUSTAINABLE
GROWTH
Korea’s economy is very open to trade and financial flows. Over the medium term, the authorities
should enhance macroeconomic and financial policy frameworks to improve the economy’s resilience
and the ability to respond to shocks. In addition, product and labor market reforms should focus on
strengthening the nontradable sector. This will be key to sustaining growth in the face of softer

14
exports to advanced economies and to reduce the economy’s vulnerability to external demand
shocks.

A. Enhancing Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks
Fiscal Policy—Resuming Consolidation and Cementing Credibility
Background

21.

Korea has a strong fiscal position by
international standards, but is faced with a
rapidly aging population. The government is,
therefore, targeting a balanced central
government budget (excluding social security
funds) by 2013–14. The consolidation is likely
to be primarily driven by expenditure
restraint, including the unwinding of the
temporary stimulus measures. However, no
significant details have been articulated on
the discretionary measures to achieve the
fiscal consolidation. While the social security
funds are currently in surplus, the asset
position of the pension fund is projected to be
depleted around 2050–60 absent further
reforms. Looking at the broader public sector,
the government also faces contingent
liabilities associated with loan guarantees and
the buildup in recent years of public
enterprise debt (around 20 percent of GDP).
Korea Land & Housing Corporation (KLHC)
alone accounts for around half of this debt,
related to its affordable-housing construction
and associated land purchases.

22.

While the government operates
under a fiscal framework, the targets are not
legally binding and often subject to revisions.
The National Fiscal Management Plan (NFMP)
and the National Debt Management Plan
(NDMP) include objectives on the size and
distribution of expenditures, the fiscal
balance, and debt. The NFMP covers the
central government, including special
accounts and public funds. However, the

objectives set in the NFMP and NDMP are not
supported by a formal fiscal rule. Moreover,
the aggregate spending ceiling is revised
every year to ensure linkage with the annual
budget, and, therefore, is not binding. Local
governments are subject to a balanced
budget rule and a total borrowing ceiling,
which is monitored by the central
government.
Staff’s Views

23.
The “Great Recession” underscored
the importance of having room to conduct
counter-cyclical fiscal policy, as effectively
demonstrated by Korea. In addition, Korea
needs to create room to accommodate the
fiscal costs associated with the rapid aging of
the population. Staff agrees with the broad
contours of the authorities’ medium-term
consolidation plan and the balanced budget is
an appropriate intermediate target. However,
more details on underlying measures would
help strengthen credibility. On the revenue
side, the adjustment could be brought about
by broadening the base for personal and
corporate income taxes and VAT. There would
also seem to be scope to raise the VAT rate
and social security contributions. On the
expenditure side, non-age-related outlays
could be streamlined, which would help
provide room for a needed expansion of the
social safety net. Additional pension reforms
should also be considered to ensure longterm sustainability of the pension fund.
Further to this, the authorities are urged to

15
take more decisive steps to strengthen the
financial position of public enterprises.

24.
A further formalization of the fiscal
framework could help better anchor fiscal
policy. In addition to publishing detailed
medium- term fiscal consolidation plans,
including details on policies to achieve the
fiscal targets, another possibility would be the
adoption of a fiscal rule for the general
government. This would make fiscal targets
more binding and strengthen prioritization
among fiscal measures. In this context, it may
be worth considering a rule targeting the
structural fiscal balance combined with
spending and debt targets. Moreover, linking
the fiscal targets more directly to future
liabilities, including those related to aging,
would help ensure that the fiscal objectives
are consistent with long-term sustainability.
In this context, it will also be important to
take further steps to enhance fiscal
transparency, including regarding contingent
liabilities, to allow for better monitoring and
assessment of fiscal risks.
The Authorities’ View

25.

The authorities broadly agreed with
many of staff’s proposals on revenue and
expenditure reforms. They acknowledged the
scope to provide more details on the
measures underlying their medium-term
consolidation plans and planned to shed more
light on these when the 2011 budget is
presented later this year. They broadly agreed
with staff’s proposals to achieve fiscal
consolidation, but were still in the early phase
of designing reforms.

26.
The authorities are considering steps
to further formalize and strengthen the
medium- term fiscal framework. The
National Finance Act was revised in April 2010

to make the NFMP and NDMP more effective,
including by publishing more details relating
to the medium-term fiscal outlook and the
evaluation of the previous year’s NFMP. The
authorities are also considering the
introduction of a fiscal rule, but have at this
stage not decided on the exact rule. They saw
merit in strengthening the analysis of the
long-term fiscal outlook and assessment of
future fiscal risks to help them better
determine a sustainable fiscal path. On public
enterprise debt, they were somewhat more
sanguine because KLHC debt, for example, is
backed by land and real estate assets.
Monetary Policy—Broadening Objectives
and Strengthening Coordination
Background

27.

The BOK’s primary policy objective is
price stability, but proposed revisions to the
central bank law could legally add financial
stability as an objective. The BOK has
operated an inflation targeting framework
since 1998. However, the BOK has also
established financial stability as one of its
core objectives consistent with its lender-oflast resort role. But, a revision to the Bank of
Korea Act calling for the BOK to pay attention
to financial stability is still awaiting debate in
the National Assembly.

28.
The global crisis has raised
awareness about potential weaknesses in
the current institutional arrangements for
systemic risk management. In response, the
authorities have already taken some
measures, including the signing last year of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between the MOFS, the BOK, the Financial
Supervisory Services (FSS), the Financial
Services Commission (FSC) and the Korea
Deposit Insurance Corporation to share more

16
information about individual financial
institutions. This was in recognition of
information deficiencies that came to light
when the BOK liquidity facilities were
extended to a broader set of financial
institutions.

which may initially require a macroprudential
response. Moreover, the BOK is well placed to
analyze overarching systemic risks and
macrofinancial linkages, areas of key
importance for the assessment of financial
stability.

Staff’s Views

31.
The current coordination
mechanism, while having proven effective
during the recent crisis, still has room for
improvement along several dimensions. The
current framework involves multiple channels
of policy coordination and risks leading to
perceptions of political interference in the
design of financial stability policies. This could
undermine the perceived independence and
effectiveness of the various agencies tasked
with different aspects of financial stability.
Current institutional arrangements also make
it less clear which agency is best placed to
develop the needed analytical capacity for
analyzing macrofinancial linkages. To address
this, one option that broadly preserves the
current overall institutional arrangement
could be the establishment of a permanent
“Financial System Stability Council” with
representation of all agencies that are
charged with financial stability
responsibilities. This would serve as a
formalized coordinating framework, but with
institutional safeguards ensuring that
monetary policy is decided independently by
the BOK’s Monetary Policy Committee. Such a
council would give the BOK an opportunity to
provide ongoing input into macro-prudential
policies, which could still rest with FSC/FSS. It
would also strengthen information sharing
and understanding of macrofinancial linkages,
including through joint stress testing and
cross-fertilization of comparative skills and
knowledge. In this context, it will be
particularly important to strengthen the
analytical tool kit for macrofinancial analysis
and expertise within the BOK given the

29.

The global crisis has demonstrated
how “benign neglect” may have allowed for
a buildup of asset price bubbles and
excessive leverage in some economies.
Moreover, asset price inflation can have
implications for economic activity and
inflation through wealth and confidence
effects. While overall price stability should
remain the BOK’s primary objective, it may be
appropriate to consider broadening the
monetary policy framework to explicitly allow
for discretionary policy responses (“leaning
against the wind”) in the event of sustained
asset price inflation or the pro-cyclical buildup
of leverage, should it be judged to have a
bearing on the inflation outlook and/or
macroeconomic and financial stability (Box 3).

30.

There is also scope to further enhance
the coordination between the BOK and the
supervisors/regulators during “normal” times
to better internalize macrofinancial linkages.
This is important to better align the institutional
arrangements with cross-agency
responsibilities, including BOK’s role with
respect to financial stability in light of its lenderof-last resort function. It is also critical because
of the inter-relation between monetary policy
and financial stability. Financial instability could,
for example, be exacerbated if the monetary
policy rate is set too low, leading to excessive
leverage or generalized asset price inflation. At
the same time, policy rates may be a blunt tool
for addressing financial instability if it arises
from factors such as localized housing bubbles,

17

Box 3. A Role for Asset Prices in Korea’s Monetary Policy Framework? 2
Inflation targeting (IT) has been a key element of the
robust macroeconomic framework in place in Korea.
The BOK’s IT framework has helped successfully anchor
inflation while supporting growth, but may benefit
from focusing on a broader set of potential sources of
inflation. In practice, the BOK has applied IT flexibly by
also “keeping an eye” on asset prices. Considering the
role played by asset bubbles in the global crisis, one
option may, therefore, be to broaden the monetary
policy framework to more systematically account for
asset prices. In fact, a structural model for Korea
suggests that incorporating asset prices in the
framework could help meet the inflation target more
frequently and reduce output volatility.
There are generally two schools of thought with
regard to the role for asset prices in the conduct of
monetary policy. The “benign neglect” camp suggests
that monetary authorities should only deal with the
financial instability that may result from a collapse of
asset prices, but should not adjust monetary policy
preemptively as it is difficult to identify a bubble. A
competing view is that the central bank should “lean
against the wind” through preemptive tightening to
prevent the buildup and subsequent collapse of a
bubble. While identifying a bubble is challenging, the
costs of the bursting of a bubble are too great to
overlook. Our rationalization of why asset prices matter
is two-fold. First, changes in asset prices can influence
economic activity through wealth and confidence
effects. Second, forward looking monetary policy
decisions could benefit from information embedded in
asset prices about expected changes in inflation and
the output gap.
To illustrate the potential implications of explicitly
incorporating asset prices into practical policy making
in Korea, an augmented monetary policy rule is
presented here. It is assumed that the central bank
would react to movements in asset prices only if the
filtered growth rate of asset prices (adjusted for the
filtered growth rate of output) deviates significantly
from the inflation target over a few consecutive
periods. 1 The intuition is that if asset prices move in
_____________________________
1

Filtered growth rate for variable

2

Prepared by Filiz Unsal.

line with output and hence inflation in the longer term,
then a persistent change in the growth of asset prices
may signal a shift in trend inflation. In turn, this would
imply an interest rate rule of the form:

it  itTaylor
 itM
t 1

Taylor

, where it

is the interest rate implied by the
M

conventional Taylor rule. it

is the additional reaction,

which only becomes operational if the deviation
between filtered asset price growth and the inflation
target is significant over an extended period. This rule
implies that even under low and stable inflation, the
central bank may choose to “lean against the wind” in
response to emerging asset bubbles and potential
overheating. In fact, there have been cases in the past
where policies have responded to asset market
developments. Recently, for example, the Swedish
Riksbank justified the hike in the policy rate in October
2009 by the pointing to the rise in house prices, even
though inflation appeared to be on target.
Applying this monetary policy rule to Korea suggests
that its application may strengthen inflation targeting
and lessen output volatility. As an illustration, we
compare the stabilization properties of the traditional
Taylor rule with that of the augmented framework for
Korea incorporating asset prices. Simulations suggest
that the augmented framework may help the central
bank react more systematically to emerging
overheating in the economy as signaled by sustained
asset price inflation, in addition to the output gap.
Indeed, the deviation of inflation from its target and
the size of the output gap are shown to be much
smaller under the augmented rule, although the impact
on the variance is neglible. Thus, the augmented
framework can be a useful approach to stabilize output
and inflation by making better use of market
information.
Inflation Deviation from T arget

Output Gap

Mean

Variance

Mean

Variance

Without asset prices

1.27

3.9

2.69

16.75

With asset prices

0.02

3.8

0.21

16.72

s (in log) is calculated as: st f  st1 f  (st  st1 f ) where  denotes the first difference operator.

18
importance of central banks in financial
stability. 2
The Authorities’ Views

32.

The authorities viewed the current
monetary policy framework as broadly
appropriate, but also saw merit in “leaning
against the wind.” With the current inflation
target range of 3±1 percent, the central bank
has flexibility to react to other factors,
including asset prices. However, the recent
global economic crisis had compelled them to
look more closely at asset prices and consider
the merits of broadening the monetary
framework to allow for discretionary
responses to asset prices. They also
considered that this broadened monetary
framework may be better aligned with their
responsibility of also safeguarding financial
stability.

33.
The authorities in general saw little
scope for upgrading and formalizing their
current framework for inter-agency

coordination. The authorities noted that their
current coordination framework had worked
well during the crisis and were of the view
that it was well suited for normal times. There
had also been progress on coordination,
including through last year’s MOUs on
information sharing. The authorities did
recognize that a more formalized
coordination framework would improve the
transparency of the coordination process, but
it was also noted that this would not
necessarily result in effective coordination.
Moreover, it was pointed out that the
establishment of the council would involve
significant changes to the legal framework
underpinning the relevant institutions.
However, the BOK saw merit in a
macroprudential framework where they
would play a more active role. In the BOK’s
view, this would be in line with recent trends
in major advanced economies (including the
United States, United Kingdom, and other
European countries) of a stronger
macroprudential role for central banks.

B. Safeguarding Financial Sector Stability
Background

34.
The soundness of Korea’s financial
sector was crucial to the resilience of the
Korean economy during the global crisis.
Korean banks entered the 2008 crisis well
capitalized and with low nonperforming
loans, although their reliance on wholesale
funding proved to be a vulnerability. Since the
crisis, banks have raised their average CAR to
14.6 percent, 2 percentage points above precrisis levels. Moreover, nonperforming loan
ratios have remained low on average, partly
due to significant write-offs, but remain high
for (nonsystemically important) savings banks
exposed to ailing construction companies.

35.

In recognition of some of the
vulnerabilities facing the financial sector, the
authorities have preemptively taken a
number steps. To address vulnerabilities
associated with wholesale funding, the loanto-deposit ratio will be capped at 100 percent
from 2014, and stronger foreign currency
liquidity standards have been introduced to
reduce maturity mismatches and improve the
quality of liquid assets. Prudential steps have

________________
2

See Hyun Song Shin, Risk and Liquidity (Clarendon
Lectures in Finance) (2010) pp. 171-75.

19
recently been taken to limit banks’ foreign
currency forward positions (related to
exporters’ hedging) and the associated
external debt position—the forward position
is limited at 50 percent and 250 percent of
capital for domestic and foreign bank
branches, respectively. Moreover, exporters’
hedge ratio has been capped at 100 percent
to reduce speculative demand for forward
contracts, and regulations for domestic
foreign currency lending have been tightened.
Staff’s Views

36.
In light of the lessons from the global
financial crisis, there is a need in Korea, as
elsewhere, to further upgrade regulatory
and supervisory frameworks. Staff supports
the recent measures taken by the authorities
and their readiness to adopt the tighter
regulatory and supervisory frameworks
emerging from the international debate. The
measures taken thus far are likely to reduce
the banking system’s vulnerability to abrupt
shift in the availability of foreign currency
liquidity. Looking forward, the outcome of
discussions on core-funding ratios, the
treatment of foreign-bank branches,
countercyclical capital charges and other
measures to reduce the procyclicality of
leverage will be particularly important for
Korea. As the full implication of all the
impending changes become clearer, the
authorities may have to stand ready to revisit
the design of some of the preemptive
measures. As pointed out during previous
Article IV consultations, there is also scope to
improve stress testing within banks and the
regulators and the FSAP update envisaged for
early 2011 will follow up further on this and
other broader issues.
37.
The likely future changes in the
financial architecture in Korea could pose

new risks and may call for a further
recalibration of frameworks. The 2009
Financial Investment Services and Capital
Markets Act (FISCMA) opened the door for
consolidation of the securities industry and
the emergence of domestic investment
banks. It will also likely serve to make the
nonbank financial sector an increasingly
important player in the financial markets.
Although increased competition should
generate efficiency gains and improve the
allocation of capital, it may also increase
banks’ dependence on wholesale funding as
new financial services and instruments
provide alternatives to bank deposits.
Moreover, it is likely to make financial
markets and risks more complicated to
monitor and supervise. These implications
place a premium on ensuring that
supervision, regulation, and the PCA and
resolution frameworks, and the lender-of-last
resort function are adequately calibrated to
deal with the changing financial architecture.
In this context, the authorities should also be
mindful of the systemic risks associated with
further consolidation, including through the
establishment of “mega banks” in the already
highly concentrated banking sector.

38.
Staff shares the authorities’ concerns
regarding Korea’s vulnerability to the
potentially destabilizing effects of volatile
international capital flows. The recently
introduced package of foreign currency
related measures will help limit the
speculative component of the forward hedges
of corporates, and reduce the volume of
short-term external debt of banks and their
foreign currency maturity mismatches.
However, the measures are unlikely to
substantially reduce the economy’s
vulnerability to sudden stops, as the channel
of transmission of international shocks
related to short-term bank debt may partly

20
shift to portfolio flows. For an exportdependent economy with an open capital
account, the best line of defense remains a
freely floating exchange rate to avoid
generating expectations of one way bets that
may lead to higher than optimal hedge ratios
or carry trades. In addition, measures to
further strengthen the financial sector would
also enhance the ability of the economy to
cope with externally generated shocks,
including through macroprudential measures.
Moreover, the authorities should be mindful
of the impact of any measures on foreign
exchange liquidity, since a reduction in
liquidity could increase the volatility of the
won. The authorities may also wish to further
analyze the potential consequences for
liquidity management of multinational banks
facing different requirements in different
countries.
The Authorities’ View

39.

The authorities re-emphasized their
readiness to adopt new measures emerging
from international consensus on regulatory
and supervisory frameworks. They generally
agree with the current proposals being
discussed by international bodies, although
they suggested a need to allow for flexibility
across countries. The authorities concurred

that the potential change in the financial
architecture, partly driven by the FISCMA,
could imply new and more complicated risks,
but explained that they had already taken
steps to address these, including by
strengthening consolidated supervision of
bank holding companies. Moreover, the
authorities are committed to monitor the
evolution of the financial sector closely and
calibrate the regulatory and supervisory
frameworks accordingly.

40.

The recently introduced foreign
currency measures are prudential and
intended to reduce capital flow volatility
within the current framework of an open
capital account. The measures were intended
to strengthen the soundness of the financial
sector by lowering its exposure to external
short-term debt. While the authorities noted
that some of the hedging-related transactions
may move offshore, they suggested that
additional costs may discourage corporates.
They also recognized that these measures
would not have much impact on overall
capital flows in and out of Korea’s liquid
equity and bond markets. They agreed with
staff that a flexible exchange rate and a sound
financial sector are the best defense against
capital flow reversals.

C. Product and Labor Market Policies—Diversifying the Sources of Growth
Background

41.

Korea has relied heavily on its export
engine to deliver growth over the past few
decades, but this has also made the
economy vulnerable to external shocks.
Moreover, import demand from advancedeconomies is likely to be smaller in a post-

crisis environment where private and public
sector balance sheets have to undergo repair.
Consequently, the economy will have to rely
more on the nontradable sector as a second
growth engine and to make the economy
more resilient to external shocks, although
this is complicated by the relatively weak
balance sheet positions of both SMEs and

21
households.3 Moreover, a real appreciation of
the exchange rate would also provide impetus
for diversifying the sources of growth.
Staff’s Views

42.

A top priority is to reduce the
productivity gap between the tradable and
nontradable sectors. To raise productivity in
the nontradable sector it is, as previously
recommended, important to step up efforts
to expedite bank-led restructuring of the
heavily indebted SMEs, open the service
sector to more competition by lowering entry
barriers and making it easier for foreign
companies to invest in Korea. Eliminating the
preferential tax treatment of the exportoriented sector would also help rebalance
growth away from the export sector.

43.

It will also be key to support the
supply-side transition through labor and
social policy reform. As previously
recommended, there is scope to reduce the
high level of employment protection for
regular workers to raise labor market
flexibility and employment growth.4 However,
any easing of employment protection should
be accompanied by an expansion in the social
safety net for both regular and nonregular
workers to provide some income protection
in case of layoffs. More focus on education
(including tertiary) and training linked to the
service sector, targeted at both regular and
nonregular workers, could also support
growth in the nontradable sector. Moreover,
raising participation rates of women and
elderly would counter the aging-related
decline in the labor force.
The Authorities’ Views

sector and have already taken several
initiatives to this effect. They plan to scale
back SME guarantees further over the
medium term and issue them more
selectively, focusing on promising start ups.
The government will continue with the
implementation of the plans announced in
recent years to develop the service industry:
A number of service industries were chosen
on the basis of potential for job creation,
value added, and growth and will be nurtured
through streamlined regulation and increased
competition. The government has also
signaled its intention to equalize tax
treatment between the manufacturing sector
and the service sector, although by extending
preferential tax treatment to selected
services. They recognize that employment
protection is high and in practice more than
prescribed by the law, but regular workers at
large companies are reluctant to reduce it.
They also see a need for a better skills match
and have launched a number of measures to
address this, including by linking government
funding for universities to their ability to find
relevant jobs for their graduates. In the area
of labor reform, the government is
considering ways to facilitate part-time
employment and extend daycare facilities, as
this should help to raise the share of women,
students, and elderly in the labor force. There
are also efforts under way to address the
adverse employment implication of the
seniority-based wage system, including by
introducing a “wage-peak system.”

__________________
3

See Selected Issues Paper for further details on
rebalancing and indebtedness.
4

44.

The authorities recognize the need to
rebalance growth towards the nontradables

Please see Selected Issues Paper for details on the
impact of employment protection on labor dynamics.

22

V. STAFF APPRAISAL
45.

The Korean economy has staged an
impressive recovery since early 2009 thanks
to the authorities’ supportive policies, and
the normalization in global trade. Growth is
expected to rebound to 6.1 percent in 2010
and moderate to 4½ percent in 2011, with
economic activity increasingly led by the
private sector. Near-term risks to this baseline
appear broadly balanced at the moment.

46.
In light of the strong economic
recovery, a carefully calibrated exit from
supportive macroeconomic policies is
appropriate. While the 2010 budget is
estimated to subtract around 1 percentage
point from growth, monetary policy remains
highly accommodative, somewhat beyond
what is necessary to support the recovery. It
is appropriate for the BOK to continue to
gradually raise the policy rate and the recent
hike is a welcome start. To further raise the
policy rate would still leave monetary policy
highly supportive of the recovery that is being
anticipated in the baseline. A measured fiscal
withdrawal in 2011 would be appropriate
with the economy above potential. Preserving
flexibility of the exchange rate is also a key
element of this exit strategy. At the same
time, the authorities should stand ready to
respond appropriately in the event of a sharp
rise in global risk aversion related to the
stress in European sovereign debt markets.

48.

It is appropriate to now shift the
focus from crisis management to the
medium-term strategy to sustain growth and
enhance the economy’s resilience. This
strategy should build on lessons from the
global crisis. In this context, the authorities’
plan for fiscal consolidation over the medium
term, aiming to achieve a balanced budget
(excluding social security funds) by 2013–14,
is a welcome start in light of the aging
population and the need to retain fiscal room
for counter-cyclical policies. More details on
the planned measures to achieve this target
would further enhance credibility. A further
formalization of the medium-term fiscal
framework, including through the
introduction of a fiscal rule, would provide an
additional anchor for fiscal policy.

49.
The global crisis demonstrated how
“benign neglect” in monetary policy may
have allowed for a buildup of asset price
bubbles and excessive leverage in some
economies. While overall price stability
should remain the BOK’s primary objective, it
may be appropriate to consider broadening
the monetary policy framework to allow for
discretionary policy responses in the event of
emerging price pressures in asset markets or
excessive buildup of leverage, should it be
judged to have a bearing on the inflation
outlook and/or macroeconomic and financial
stability.

47.

The announced steps to scale back
the amount and coverage of SME guarantees
to pre-crisis levels and expiration of bank
guidance to roll over maturing SME loans are
welcome. With financial conditions having
normalized, the financial sector support
measures can also be unwound without
putting the recovery at risk.

50.
It is also appropriate to consider how
to further upgrade macroeconomic policy
and regulatory frameworks to enhance the
resilience of the economy during normal
times. A key lesson of the global crisis is the
need to better internalize macrofinancial
linkages and strengthen the coordination
process among all the relevant agencies

23
charged with financial stability. Financial
instability could, for example, be exacerbated
by overly accommodative monetary policy
settings. At the same time, policy rates may
be a blunt tool for addressing financial
instability emerging in specific sectors, which
may initially require a macro-prudential
response. Another key lesson from the global
crisis is the need to strengthen supervisory
and regulatory frameworks across the world,
and we welcome the Korean authorities’ preemptive steps in that direction and their
readiness to adopt new measures that will
emerge from international consensus.

51.

Korea’s vulnerability to the
potentially destabilizing effects of volatile
international capital flows remain of
concern. The recently introduced foreign
currency related measures may reduce banks’
external indebtedness and strengthen
liquidity management. However, they are not
likely to substantially reduce the economy’s
vulnerability to sudden stops given the

welcome commitment to an open capital
account. For an export-dependent economy
with an open capital account, the best line of
defense remains a flexible exchange rate and
a sound financial sector.

52.

The recent global crisis has exposed
the risks of an open economy relying on a
single engine of growth. Strengthening
domestic sources of growth would reduce
Korea’s vulnerability to economic downturns
elsewhere in the world. In this context,
reducing the policy bias towards exports and
bolder reforms to increase productivity in the
nontradable sector would be welcome. More
labor market flexibility and increased social
protection would facilitate the reallocation of
labor to new growth sectors while minimizing
adjustment costs. Continuing efforts to
increase labor market participation would
also be welcome.

53.

It is recommended that the next
Article IV consultation take place on the
standard 12-month cycle.

24
Table 1. Korea: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–11
Nominal GDP (2009): $832.3 billion
Main exports (percent of total, 2009): Electronics (33), vessels (12), and road vehicles (6).
GDP per capita (2009): $17,071
Unemployment rate (2009): 3.7 percent
FDI (2009): $1.5 billion
Central government debt (2009): 32.6 percent of GDP
Foreign central government debt (2009): 3.2 percent of total central government debt
Projections
2010
2011

2006

2007

2008

2009

5.2
4.9
4.6
5.1
3.4
0.3
0.3

5.1
4.5
4.9
5.1
4.2
-0.3
0.7

2.3
1.4
0.8
2.0
-1.9
0.6
1.1

0.2
-3.2
0.8
1.2
-0.2
-3.8
3.1

6.1
6.4
3.4
2.6
5.3
2.7
0.2

4.5
3.3
2.9
3.3
1.9
0.4
1.5

908.7

975.0

1,026.5

1,063.1

1,154.1

1,249.7

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross domestic investment
Current account balance

30.2
29.6
0.6

30.0
29.4
0.6

30.6
31.2
-0.6

31.0
25.9
5.1

31.7
29.5
2.2

31.4
28.9
2.5

Prices (percent change)
CPI inflation (end of period)
Core inflation (average)
GDP deflator
Real effective exchange rate

2.1
1.8
-0.1
7.4

3.6
2.3
2.1
0.1

4.1
4.3
2.9
-19.9

2.8
3.6
3.4
-12.4

3.0
2.3
2.3
…

3.5
2.5
3.6
…

Trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

13.2
10.5
-6.6

10.4
9.0
-2.5

6.8
0.9
-14.3

0.0
-7.9
8.9

14.7
16.7
-2.9

9.3
7.9
0.4

Consolidated central government (in percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Excluding Social Security Funds

23.1
21.3
1.7
-1.2

25.0
21.5
3.5
0.4

24.4
23.3
1.2
-1.5

24.0
25.7
-1.7
-4.1

23.7
22.8
0.9
-1.4

23.5
22.0
1.5
-0.8

Money and credit (end of period)
Overnight call rate 2/
Three-year AA- corporate bond yield 2/
M3 growth (y/y, in percent) 3/

4.6
5.3
10.5

5.0
6.8
10.0

2.9
7.7
9.1

2.0
5.5
9.4

2.0
4.8
9.2

…
…
…

Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Oil imports
Current account balance
Gross international reserves (end of period) 4/
In percent of short-term debt (residual maturity)

331.8
303.9
55.9
5.4
238.9
172.5

379.0
350.9
60.3
5.9
262.1
130.8

432.9
427.3
85.9
-5.8
201.1
105.3

373.6
317.5
52.9
42.7
269.9
138.2

459.9
409.6
68.6
22.4
280.3
144.0

510.2
446.5
72.9
27.4
294.0
152.2

External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Total external debt (end of period)
Of which : Short-term (end of period)
Total external debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service ratio 5/

260.1
113.7
27.3
7.4

383.2
160.2
36.5
7.5

377.9
149.9
40.5
10.2

401.9
150.0
48.3
10.5

402.0
149.1
40.0
9.1

400.5
147.7
36.8
8.4

Real GDP (percent change)
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Stock building 1/
Net foreign balance 1/
Nominal GDP (in trillions of won)

Sources: Korean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ Data for 2010 are as of August 2.
3/ Data for 2010 are as of May.
4/ Excluding gold.
5/ Debt service on medium- and long-term debt in percent of exports of goods and services.

25
Table 2. Korea: Balance of Payments, 2005–10
(In billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)

2005

Current account balance

2006

2007

2008

2009

Projections
2010

15.0

5.4

5.9

-5.8

42.7

22.4

Trade balance

32.7

27.9

28.2

5.7

56.1

50.4

Exports

289.0

331.8

379.0

432.9

373.6

459.9

Imports

256.3

303.9

350.9

427.3

317.5

409.6

Services

-13.7

-19.0

-19.8

-16.7

-17.2

-25.0

Income

-1.6

0.5

1.0

5.9

4.6

-2.4

Current transfers

-2.5

-4.1

-3.5

-0.7

-0.8

-0.6

7.0

18.5

7.6

-49.6

26.9

-11.6

9.3

21.6

10.0

-49.7

25.7

-9.1

Portfolio investment, net

-1.7

-22.7

-20.6

-17.2

45.1

19.4

Direct investment, net
Other investment, assets

2.0
-2.7

-4.5
-7.9

-13.8
-16.8

-15.6
-13.7

-9.1
0.4

-14.0
-7.0

Other investment, liabilities

11.7

56.8

61.2

-3.2

-10.8

-7.5

-2.3

-3.1

-2.4

0.1

1.2

-2.5

0.1

-1.2

2.1

-0.6

-0.1

0.0

22.1

22.6

15.6

-56.0

69.5

10.8

-22.1

-22.6

-15.6

56.0

-69.5

-10.8

Current account balance (in percent of GDP)

1.8

0.6

0.6

-0.6

5.1

2.2

Trade balance (in percent of GDP)

3.9

2.9

2.7

0.6

6.7

5.0

210.3

238.9

262.1

201.1

269.9

280.3

Financial and capital account balance
Financial account

Capital account
Net errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Memorandum items:

Gross reserves 1/
(In months of imports of goods and services)
External debt

8.0

7.7

7.2

4.6

8.2

6.7

187.9

260.1

383.2

377.9

401.9

402.0

(in percent of GDP)

22.2

27.3

36.5

40.5

48.3

40.0

65.9

113.7

160.2

149.9

150.0

149.1

844.8

951.2

1049.1

933.0

832.3

1005.9

Short-term external debt (inc. trade credits)
Nominal GDP

Sources: Korean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding gold.

26
Table 3. Korea: Consolidated Central Government Operations, 2005–11
Projections

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

(In trillions of won)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Social security contributions
Nontax and capital revenue

191.4
127.5
24.9
39.1

209.6
138.0
27.3
44.2

243.6
161.5
29.7
52.4

250.7
167.3
32.9
50.5

255.3
164.5
33.9
56.8

273.0
175.7
36.8
60.5

293.6
187.4
40.6
65.6

Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure 1/

175.9
148.3

193.9
161.7

209.8
169.7

238.8
196.9

272.9
209.7

262.8
210.9

274.6
218.9

10.1
138.2
24.6
3.0

12.2
149.5
26.5
5.7

13.4
156.2
33.0
7.1

14.4
182.5
36.5
5.5

16.0
193.7
45.1
18.0

16.3
194.6
45.9
5.9

19.9
199.0
49.7
5.9

15.5
23.6
-8.1

15.6
26.4
-10.8

33.8
30.2
3.6

11.9
27.5
-15.7

-17.6
25.6
-43.2

10.2
26.1
-15.9

19.0
29.5
-10.6

Interest
Noninterest
Capital expenditure
Net lending
Overall balance
Of which: Social Security Fund balance
Excluding Social Security Funds

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Social security contributions
Nontax and capital revenue

22.1
14.7
2.9
4.5

23.1
15.2
3.0
4.9

25.0
16.6
3.1
5.4

24.4
16.3
3.2
4.9

24.0
15.5
3.2
5.3

23.7
15.2
3.2
5.2

23.5
15.0
3.2
5.2

Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Interest
Noninterest
Capital expenditure
Net lending

20.3
17.1
1.2
16.0
2.8
0.3

21.3
17.8
1.3
16.5
2.9
0.6

21.5
17.4
1.4
16.0
3.4
0.7

23.3
19.2
1.4
17.8
3.6
0.5

25.7
19.7
1.5
18.2
4.2
1.7

22.8
18.3
1.4
16.9
4.0
0.5

22.0
17.5
1.6
15.9
4.0
0.5

Overall balance
Of which: Social Security Fund balance
Excluding Social Security Funds

1.8
2.7
-0.9

1.7
2.9
-1.2

3.5
3.1
0.4

1.2
2.7
-1.5

-1.7
2.4
-4.1

0.9
2.3
-1.4

1.5
2.4
-0.8

Overall structural balance

1.9

1.7

3.5

1.3

-0.9

1.0

1.5

Primary balance

3.0

3.1

4.8

2.6

-0.2

2.3

3.1

865.2

908.7

975.0

1,026.5

1,063.1

1,154.1

1249.7

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (trillion won)

Sources: Ministry of Planning and Budget; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ The conversion of KDIC and KAMCO bonds is excluded, amounting to W 13 trillion in 2003, and W 12 trillion annually until 2006.

27
Table 4. Korea: Medium-Term Projections, 2007–15
Projections
2012
2013

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

5.1
4.5
4.9
5.1
4.2
-0.3
0.7

2.3
1.4
0.8
2.0
-1.9
0.6
1.1

0.2
-3.2
0.8
1.2
-0.2
-3.8
3.1

6.1
6.4
3.4
2.6
5.3
2.7
0.2

4.5
3.3
2.9
3.3
1.9
0.4
1.5

4.2
3.7
3.8
3.8
3.7
0.0
0.7

2.5
2.1

4.7
2.9

2.8
3.4

3.1
2.3

3.4
3.6

Savings and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Gross domestic investment
Current account balance

30.0
29.4
0.6

30.6
31.2
-0.6

31.0
25.9
5.1

31.7
29.5
2.2

Consolidated central government (in percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance 2/
Excluding Social Security Funds
Debt, domestic plus external 3/
Government guaranteed restructuring bonds 4/

25.0
21.5
3.5
0.4
29.7
3.4

24.4
23.3
1.2
-1.5
29.0
2.7

24.0
25.7
-1.7
-4.1
32.6
4.6

Trade (percent change)
Merchandise exports
Volumes 4/
Merchandise imports
Volumes 4/
Terms of trade

14.2
10.4
15.4
9.0
-2.5

14.2
6.8
21.8
0.9
-14.3

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account
Trade balance
Merchandise exports
Merchandise imports

5.9
28.2
379.0
350.9

External debt
In billions of U.S. dollars 5/
(as percent of GDP)
Debt service ratio 6/

Real GDP (percent change)
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Stock building 1/
Net foreign balance 1/
Prices, period average (percent change)
Consumer price
GDP deflator

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (trillion won)
Per capita GDP (U.S. dollars)
Output gap (percent of potential GDP)

2014

2015

4.1
3.9
3.9
3.8
4.3
0.0
0.5

4.0
3.9
3.9
3.8
4.3
0.0
0.4

4.0
3.9
3.9
3.8
4.3
0.0
0.4

3.0
2.8

3.0
2.1

3.0
2.9

3.0
3.2

31.4
28.9
2.5

31.1
28.8
2.3

31.4
29.1
2.3

31.3
29.2
2.0

31.0
28.9
2.0

23.7
22.8
0.9
-1.4
32.1
3.1

23.5
22.0
1.5
-0.8
30.5
2.6

23.7
21.8
1.9
-0.4
28.8
2.1

24.0
21.8
2.2
-0.1
27.3
1.7

24.1
21.7
2.4
0.0
25.4
1.3

24.1
21.8
2.4
0.0
23.7
1.0

-13.7
0.0
-25.7
-7.9
8.9

23.1
14.7
29.0
16.7
-2.9

10.9
9.3
9.0
7.9
0.4

9.9
9.5
11.2
9.6
-1.0

9.1
9.6
11.3
10.4
-1.2

9.2
9.1
10.8
9.9
-0.7

9.1
9.1
9.5
9.9
0.4

-5.8
5.7
432.9
427.3

42.7
56.1
373.6
317.5

22.4
50.4
459.9
409.6

27.4
63.6
510.2
446.5

26.6
64.5
560.9
496.5

28.6
59.5
612.0
552.4

26.8
56.3
668.5
612.3

28.8
59.3
729.6
670.3

383.2
36.5
7.5

377.9
40.5
10.2

401.9
48.3
10.5

402.0
40.0
9.1

400.5
36.8
8.4

399.3
34.4
8.6

396.5
32.2
8.9

391.9
29.8
8.4

385.3
27.2
7.6

975
21,651
0.0

1,026
19,195
-0.7

1,063
17,071
-3.1

1,154
20,566
-0.5

1,250
22,173
0.3

1,339
23,585
0.4

1,424
24,917
0.4

1,523
26,596
0.2

1,635
28,486
0.0

Sources: Korean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ Excludes privatization receipts and conversion of KDIC/KAMCO bonds into treasury bonds.
3/ During 2003-06, W 49 trillion in government guaranteed KDIC/KAMCO bonds have been converted into treasury bonds.
4/ Customs clearance basis.
5/ Includes IMF and offshore borrowing of domestic financial institutions and debt contracted by their overseas branches.
6/ Debt service on medium- and long-term debt in percent of exports of goods and services.

28

Table 5. Korea: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2003–09
2003

2004

2006

2007

2008

2009

110.1
75.2
34.9

125.5
83.3
42.2

121.0
79.3
41.7

22.5
5.1
32.9

13.2
6.9
60.0

4.8
5.2
-6.4

12.3
9.0
1.1
2.4

12.3
8.8
0.5
2.3

14.4
10.9
0.4
2.0

(In percent of total loans)
1.3
0.9
0.7
1.1
0.7
0.7
13.8
10.5
8.8
5.4
4.5
3.8

1.2
1.1
9.1
3.5

1.2
1.4
9.2
3.7

(In percent)

Financial Sector
Total loans/GDP
Commercial banks
Other financial institutions

2005

92.4
65.1
27.3

88.8
61.9
26.8

17.9
13.8
-13.3

3.0
8.9
-11.1

Banks 1/
Capital adequacy ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Return on assets
Net interest margin

11.2
7.0
0.2
2.6

12.1
8.0
0.9
2.6

Substandard or below loans
Commercial banks
Specialized banks
Mutual savings banks
Credit unions

2.8
2.4
11.8
6.3

2.0
1.7
13.0
6.0

Corporate debt/GDP 2/
Delinquency ratio (domestic commercial bank lo

109.1
2.1

104.9
2.1

104.3
1.5

112.0
1.2

117.5
1.0

144.1
1.6

139.1
1.0

Debt ratio to:
Equity
Total assets
Sales

123.4
28.3
26.6

104.2
24.0
20.7

100.9
22.9
19.9

98.9
22.4
19.9

108.0
25.1
23.6

124.5
26.4
24.5

…
…
…

Interest coverage ratio 3/
Current assets/current liabilities

367.1
109.8

575.8
117.0

525.4
121.4

439.3
120.5

425.7
119.6

408.7
112.3

…
…

6.9
-1.9
4.7

7.6
-1.3
7.8

6.1
-1.2
6.6

5.3
-1.2
5.8

5.8
-1.4
6.1

5.9
-1.4
3.1

…
…
…

62.5
36.0

68.7
38.8

66.7
37.2

(In percent)
1.1
0.7
2.2
1.7

0.6
1.3

0.6
1.8

0.5
1.4

4.0
6.3

3.1
5.4

3.1
5.0

1.5
2.7

4.7
10.7
15.9

17.7
13.4
-4.6

(In percent)
13.0
12.8
9.3
9.2
1.3
1.1
2.8
2.6

(In percent)

Corporate Sector

Operating income/sales
Financial expenses/sales
Ordinary income/sales

102.4
71.0
31.3

(Year-on-year percent change)

Bank loans
SMEs
Households
Large companies

91.9
63.3
28.6

(In percent of GDP)

Household Sector
Household credit
Of which : Commercial banks

59.8
33.9

60.1
35.0

Delinquency ratio (all bank loans)
Households
Credit card 4/

1.8
7.8

1.7
4.1

Housing prices, percent change
Of which : Seoul

5.7
6.8

-2.1
-1.4

62.6
36.7

62.7
37.3

11.6
18.9

Sources: Bank of Korea; Financial Supervisory Service; and CEIC Data Company Ltd.
1/ Includes nationwide commercial banks, regional banks, and specialized banks.
2/ Includes nonfinancial corporations.
3/ Operating income to gross interest payments. Operating income treats depreciation as an expense, so this ratio is
lower than calculations using earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation allowance (EBITDA).
4/ Over one month.

29

Table 6. Korea: Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 2005–10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2010
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Financial indicators
Consolidated central government debt 1/
Broad money (M3, percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (Dep. Corp. survey, percent change, 12-month basis)
One-month call borrowing rate
One-month call borrowing rate (real)

33.9
7.4
8.5
3.8
1.1

34.1
10.5
16.2
4.6
2.5

33.0
10.0
14.7
5.0
1.4

31.8
9.1
16.8
2.9
-1.2

35.4
9.4
2.6
2.0
-0.8

35.2
9.2
4.1
2.0
-0.6

Proj.
May-10
May-10
Jul-10
Jul-10

External indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Terms of trade (percent change, 12-month basis)
Current account balance (projection for full year)

12.1
16.4
-7.3
1.8

14.8
18.6
-6.6
0.6

14.2
15.4
-2.5
0.6

14.2
21.8
-14.3
-0.6

-13.7
-25.7
8.9
5.1

31.7
41.1
-6.1
2.2

Jun-10
Jun-10
May-10
Proj.

0.8
1.1
1.1
0.1

1.9
0.0
5.9
0.1

0.7
2.3
5.8
0.1

-5.3
-10.3
-0.4
0.2

3.2
-0.1
-1.3
0.1

-1.2
2.6
-0.8
...

Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
...

210.3
2.2
32.2
8.0
6.5
239.6

238.9
3.9
40.4
7.7
6.9
172.5

262.1
9.6
58.9
7.2
6.9
130.8

201.1
18.3
59.0
4.6
7.3
105.3

269.9
12.8
65.7
8.2
6.4
138.2

274.2
...
...
6.7
6.5
144.0

Jun-10
...
...
Proj.
May-10
Proj.

22.2
1.0
7.8
56.2
1.4
6.6

27.3
1.1
12.0
68.1
1.7
5.7

36.5
3.0
15.3
86.6
1.9
5.6

40.5
2.3
16.1
74.1
2.3
7.9

48.3
3.3
18.0
93.0
1.0
9.5

40.0
...
14.8
76.5
0.5
8.6

Proj.
...
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.

1,024
12.2

955
7.4

929
0.1

1,100
-17.9

1,277
-12.0

1,172 Aug 2, 10
5.3
Jun-10

1379
54.3
A3/A

1434
4.0
A3/A

1897
32.3
A2/A

1124
-40.7
A2/A

1683
49.7
A2/A

1782 Aug 2, 10
13.9 Aug 2, 10
A1/A Aug 2, 10

Capital and financial account balance (projection for full year)
Of which: Inward portfolio investment (equity, debt securities etc.)
Other investment (loans, trade credits etc.)
Inward foreign direct investment in the form of debt or loans
Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) 2/
Central bank short-term foreign liabilities (in US$ billion)
Short-term foreign liabilities of the financial sector (in US$ billion)
Official reserves in months of imports GS (projection for full year)
Broad money (M3) to reserves
Reserves to total short-term external debt (in percent) 3/
Total external debt
Of which: Public sector debt
Of which: Short-term debt
Total external debt to exports GS (in percent)
External interest payments to exports GS (in percent)
External amortization payments to exports GS (in percent)
Exchange rate (per US$, period average)
REER appreciation (+) (12-month basis)
Financial market indicators
Stock market index (KOSPI)
Stock market index (KOSPI, percent change, 12-month basis)
Foreign currency debt rating (Moody's/S&P)

Sources: Korean authorities; private market sources; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including government guaranteed restructuring bonds issued by KDIC and KAMCO.
2/ Excluding gold.
3/ Short-term debt measured on a residual maturity basis.

Date

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
August 3, 2010

Contents

Page

I.

Fund Relations .................................................................................................................2

II.

Statistical Issues ...............................................................................................................4

2
ANNEX I: KOREA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of June 30, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Joined August 26, 1955; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency
Reserve Position in Fund

SDR Million
2,927.3
2,298.9
628.4

% Quota
100.0
78.53
21.47

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
2,404.5
2,297.9

% Allocation
100.00
95.57

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Approval
Type
Date
Stand-by
12/04/1997
Of which: SRF 12/18/1997
Stand-by
07/12/1985
Stand-by
07/08/1983

VI.

Amount Approved Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
(SDR Million)
15,500.00
14,412.50
9,950.00
9,950.00
280.00
160.00
575.78
575.78

Projected Obligations to the Fund
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

Expiration
Date
12/03/2000
12/17/1998
03/10/1987
03/31/1985

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

0.04
0.04

0.09
0.09

0.31
0.31

0.31
0.31

0.31
0.31

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Korea’s exchange rate system is classified as “floating.” Previously, the exchange rate against the
U.S. dollar was allowed to float only within specified margins around the previous day’s weighted
average exchange rate in the interbank market. The margins were widened five times between
March 1990 and November 1997 (most recently to +/-10 percent), and on December 16, 1997 were
eliminated altogether. On July 19, 2010, the exchange rate was W 1,216.6=US$1. Korea maintains
exchange restrictions for security reasons, in accordance with UN Security Council Resolutions,
which have been notified to the Fund under the procedures set forth in Executive Board
Decision 144-(52/51).
VIII.

Last Article IV Consultation:

Korea is on a 12-month consultation cycle. Staff discussions for the 2009 Article IV consultation
were conducted on a mission to Seoul during June 25-July 7, 2009. The Article IV consultation was
concluded by the Executive Board on August 7, 2009. In addition, a staff visit took place during
December 2–8, 2009.

3
IX.

FSAP and ROSC Participation:

MCM: The final FSAP mission was conducted during October 2002. The mission completed the
FSAP by assessing the short-term vulnerability of the financial sector to macroeconomic and
sectoral shocks and analyzing overall financial sector soundness and developmental challenges,
including issues arising from the draft standards assessments. A follow-up technical assistance
mission on the supervision of derivatives markets was held in Seoul during January 9–20, 2003. The
Financial System Stability Assessment report has been published (Country Report No. 03/81) and is
available on the web through the following link: http://www.imf.org/external/np/fsap/fsap.asp.
FAD: Discussions on fiscal transparency were held in Seoul during June 2000, and a report was
drafted and finalized in November 2000, with input from APD staff. The report has been published
and is available on the web through the following link:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/rosc/kor/fiscal.htm.
STA: Discussions on Korea’s data dissemination practices against the IMF’s Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) were held in Seoul during December 2009, and a report was
drafted and finalized in July 2010. The report has been published and is available on the web
through the link: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2010/cr10229.pdf
X.

Technical Assistance:

FAD: A technical assistance mission visited Seoul during January 8–19, 2001 to evaluate current
practices in budgeting and public expenditure management and to provide advice on setting up a
medium-term fiscal framework. A mission visited Seoul during August 31–September 16, 2005 to
provide technical assistance on the reform of tax policy and administration.
MCM: Technical assistance missions visited Seoul to provide advice on financial holding company
supervision and derivatives regulation during December 8-17, 2008, on measures to deepen the
money market during December 4-14, 2007, on strengthening the debt management function and
further development of the government securities market during September 20-October 2, 2006, on
the reform and development of the foreign exchange market during March 30-April 13, 2006, and
on macroprudential and derivatives supervision during October 27-November 7, 2005.
STA: Technical assistance missions visited Seoul during March 29–April 12, 2000 to provide
advice on balance of payments and external debt statistics, with a view toward improving the
recording of financial derivatives and developing an international investment position statement,
and during November 28-December 11, 2007 on the GFSM 2001 framework.
XI.

Resident Representative:

The resident representative office in Seoul was opened in March 1998 and was closed in
September 2008.

4
ANNEX II: KOREA—STATISTICAL ISSUES APPENDIX
As of July 15, 2010
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision is adequate for surveillance.
National Accounts: The overall structure of the national accounts follows the recommendations of the 1993
System of National Accounts. Chain-linked (reference year 2005) and nominal GDP estimates are compiled using
the production and expenditure approaches; nominal GDP estimates are also compiled using the income approach.
After the revision to reference year 2005, the estimation method for expenditure components has been altered from
the commodity flow method to the direct estimation method, in which each expenditure component is measured
directly. The size of the informal sector has not been measured. Improved methods are required to adjust quarterly
(seasonally-unadjusted) GDP estimates to agree with annual (benchmark) GDP estimates.
Consumer Price Index: The Consumer Price Index (CPI) covers 38 urban areas (about 80 percent of the urban
population), but excludes farm and fishing households. The CPI could be further improved by extending coverage
to rural areas. The consumption basket is updated only every five years; currently, expenditure weights are derived
from the 2005 Family Income and Expenditure Survey and are in need of updating. The geometric mean of price
changes should be used as a suitable alternative to the ratio of arithmetic means of prices.
Producer Price Index: The Producer Price Index (PPI) covers all domestic industrial activities and a large segment
of service activity. It excludes exported products, however, because the Export Price Indexes are compiled
separately in Korea. The weights are based on 2005 revenue shares and are in need of updating. The PPI could be
improved by making more use of imputing missing prices using the prices of similar commodities, rather than
carrying forward the last reported price. Although an arithmetic mean of price relatives is currently used rather than
a geometric mean, a supplementary index is also compiled using a geometric mean. However, the headline PPI
should be changed to the one based on a geometric mean at the elementary level. The PPI classification by activity
conforms to the KSIC, which is itself based on the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC)--with
slight modifications only to reflect local considerations. The Korean commodity classification used for the PPI does
not conform to the Central Product Classification (CPC) and one based on the CPC should be adopted as soon as
possible.
Government Finance Statistics: Two sets of government finance statistics (GFS) are compiled for the central
government, one using national definitions and the other using internationally recognized standards. Concepts and
definitions used in the latter still follow the recommendations of the Manual on Government Finance
Statistics 1986. The data cover the budgetary units of the central government and certain extra-budgetary funds
owned or managed by budgetary units. These statistics are produced by the Digital Budget and Accounting System
(D-Brain), which integrates the preparation of budget data, accounting reports, and the generation of fiscal statistics
on a monthly basis. The D-Brain provides for automatic crosschecks at different levels of the compilation process.
The 2009 ROSC indicated that while compilation practices are generally sound, some room for improvement of the
accessibility and timeliness of data and metadata existed. Following the 2009 ROSC, the Korean authorities
resumed reporting consolidated GFS data on the general government for publication in the Government Finance
Statistics Yearbook (GFSY) and the International Financial Statistics (IFS). The last year for which GFS for the
consolidated general government were reported for publication in the GFSY and the IFS is 2007, while data for the
central government were reported for 2008. The timeliness of general government data does not comply with
SDDS requirements, mainly due to the lack in timeliness on local government source data. During the 2009 ROSC,
the authorities also agreed to improve national dissemination practices and initiated work on improving national
websites.

5
The authorities have announced an ambitious program to implement reporting according to Government Finance
Statics Manual 2001 by 2012. In recent developments, the authorities requested technical assistance with
implementing these reporting requirements.
Financial Sector Data: Monetary and financial statistics compiled by the Bank of Korea (BOK) broadly follow the
IMF’s Monetary and Financial Statistical Manual 2000. Data relating to foreign assets and foreign liabilities are
affected by the BOK practice of valuing its financial assets and liabilities at book value (rather than at market
value) and revaluing its foreign currency-denominated assets and liabilities twice yearly (rather than on a monthly
basis). The BOK is in discussion with STA about reporting monetary and financial statistics using Standardized
Report Forms (SRFs) and drafting related notes for publication in International Financial Statistics. The BOK
anticipates providing monetary and financial data via SRFs within this calendar year.
Korea has participated in the regular reporting of Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs) to the IMF for
dissemination on its website. FSI data and metadata are available to the public through the IMF’s website at:
http://fsi/FSIHome.aspx#Country.
External Sector Statistics: Korea follows the Balance of Payments Manual, fifth Edition (BPM5) framework for
the compilation of the external sector statistics, although with a few deviations; the scope of the transactions of
enterprises through accounts held abroad and of reinvested earnings is partial; trade credits with affiliated entities
are recorded under other investment; and income transactions are recorded on a cash flow basis. Based on latest
information from the authorities, improved reinvested earnings data are to be disseminated by no later than 2012.
Since January 2010, short-term loans to affiliated entities are classified in direct investment.
The quality of the quarterly external debt statistics has greatly improved. In early 2007, the BOK switched from
annual to quarterly reporting of the International Investment Position. Data dissemination on international reserves
and foreign currency liquidity generally meets the SDDS specifications. Since April 2006, the authorities have
disseminated foreign reserves data on a monthly basis rather than twice a month, as had been done since 1997.
The BOK has plans to migrate to the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual, sixth
edition (BPM6); the authorities have already assessed the resources and institutional arrangements for the
implementation.
Korea reports balance of payments and IIP data for IFS (quarterly data) and Balance of Payments Statistics
Yearbook (annual data) publications.

II. Data Standards and Quality
Subscriber to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) since September 1996. Uses SDDS
flexibility option on the timeliness of the general
government operations and analytical accounts of the
banking sector data. Korea is also availing itself of an as
relevant flexibility option for the coverage of exchange
rates.

A Data ROSC reassessment was published in July 2010.

6
Korea—Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of July 19, 2010)
Date of
Latest
Observation

Date
Received

Frequency
of

Frequency
of

Data

Reporting

7

7

Frequency
of
7
Publication

Exchange Rates

7/19/2010

7/19/2010

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary

June 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

June 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

M

Broad Money

May 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

May 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

May 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

M

7/19/2010

7/19/2010

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

June 2010

Jul. 2010

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – General

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

May 2010

Jul. 2010

Stocks of Central Government and
Central Government-Guaranteed
5
Debt

Q4 2009

External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

Authorities

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological

Data Quality –
Accuracy and

Soundness

Reliability

8

9

1

Interest Rates

2

O, O, O, LO

O, O, O, O, O

M

O, O, O, O

O, O ,LO, O, O

NA

NA

O, O, O, O

O, O, N/A, O,
NA

M

M

M

May 2010

Q

Q

Q

May 2010

June 2010

M

M

M

O, LO, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

May 2010

June 2010

M

M

M

Jun.
2010

Q

Q

Q

O, O, O, O

O, O, LO, O, LO

Jun. 2010

Q

Q

Q

May.
2010

Q

Q

Q

4

Government

GDP/GNP

Q1 2010

Gross External Debt
International Investment Position

1

Q1 2010
6

Q1 2010

Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a
foreign currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those
linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means.
2
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local
governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial assets and liabilitiy positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D); weekly (W); monthly (M); quarterly (Q); annually (A); irregular (I); and not available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC or the Substantive Update (published in July 2010, and based on the findings of the mission that took
place during December 09-22, 2009) for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards
concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O); largely observed (LO); largely not
observed (LNO); not observed (NO); and not available (NA).
9
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data,
and revision studies.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/120
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 1, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with
the Republic of Korea
On August 25, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with the Republic of Korea.1
Background
Growth has rebounded impressively since the recession in the second half of 2008.
Following the collapse in economic activity in the fourth quarter of 2008 (-16.8 percent
quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualized rate (SAAR)), the subsequent
recovery has solidified with GDP growth at 7.4 percent (q/q SAAR) in the first half of
2010. The rebound owes primarily to supportive macroeconomic and financial sector
policies. Exchange rate flexibility, the normalization of international trade, and capital
inflows have also supported the relatively quick recovery. Growth is projected at 6.1
percent in 2010, led by fixed investment and restocking before easing to 4½ percent next
year. Risks to the outlook are broadly balanced.
Despite the recovery and strong capital inflows, inflation pressures and asset valuations
remain contained. There are no signs yet of inflation pressures and inflation expectations
remain well anchored as reflected in consensus forecasts. However, both headline and
core inflation have trended up in recent months to 2.6 and 1.7 percent, respectively, from
2.3 and 1.5, respectively, in March. With Korea and other Asian economies leading the
global economic recovery, capital inflows have rebounded. Renewed investor risk
appetite and ample liquidity in the advanced economies have amplified this trend. In
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up
can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2

Korea, capital inflows have mainly been concentrated in portfolio investments, boosting
equity prices. Housing prices are above their lows in early 2009, but the momentum in
the housing market has slowed in recent months.
Korean banks entered the 2008 crisis well capitalized and with low nonperforming loans,
although their reliance on wholesale funding proved to be a vulnerability. Since the crisis,
banks have raised their average capital adequacy ratio (CAR) to 14.6 percent, 2
percentage points above pre-crisis levels. Moreover, nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios
have remained low on average, partly due to significant write-offs, but NPLs remain high
for savings banks exposed to ailing construction companies.
Exports have been buoyant, especially to China, but the rebound in imports associated
with the recovery in domestic demand has led to a narrowing of the surplus relative to
last year. Foreign exchange reserves have risen by close to US$75 billion since their
lows during the crisis, currently standing at US$274 billion. The real effective exchange
rate has appreciated by 22 percent since its weak point in March 2009, but still remains
below pre-crisis levels.
Korea has embarked on exiting from the supportive macroeconomic and financial sector
policies introduced during the crisis. The 2010 deficit is projected to decline to
1½ percent of GDP (excluding social security funds) following a deficit of 4.1 percent of
GDP in 2009, primarily driven by the nonrenewal of most stimulus measures. This
implies a negative fiscal impulse of close to 2 percent of GDP. Having kept the policy
rate unchanged at 2 percent since February 2009, the Bank of Korea in July raised the
policy rate by 25 basis points. However, monetary policy still remains highly
accommodative. Most measures in support of small- and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) are being gradually unwound, while many facilities in support of the financial
sector remain in place, although utilization has been limited.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Korean authorities for their swift and decisive policy
response, which has contributed to an impressive economic recovery since early 2009.
Growth is expected to be strong in 2010, increasingly led by private sector demand, and
the economy is likely already at, or close to, its potential level. The outlook is
nevertheless subject to downside risks related to a global economic weakening and
heightened global financial strains, especially in advanced economies.
Against this background, Directors agreed that a carefully calibrated exit from supportive
macroeconomic policies is appropriate. This comprises a measured fiscal withdrawal in
2011, a gradual normalization of policy rates given the current accommodative monetary
stance, and a further unwinding of support to the financial sector and SMEs. Directors
also called for preserving exchange rate flexibility as a key element of the exit strategy.
At the same time, it would be important that the authorities stand ready to adjust their
policy stance in the event that downside risks to growth materialize.
Directors welcomed the plan to balance the central government budget (excluding social
security funds) by 2013–14, in light of the rapidly aging population and the need to retain
room for counter-cyclical policies. Directors saw scope for broadening the tax base and
for raising social security contributions. A further formalization of the medium-term fiscal

3

framework, including through the introduction of a binding fiscal rule, would provide an
additional anchor for fiscal policy. Directors considered it prudent to monitor public
enterprises’ debt and to review their investment plans.
Directors agreed that overall price stability should remain the central bank’s over-riding
objective. Some Directors saw merit in broadening the monetary policy framework to
allow for policy responses to emerging pressures in asset markets or the excessive
buildup of leverage.
Directors underscored the need to better incorporate macro-financial linkages into the
policymaking process. Most Directors noted that, while taking into account countryspecific circumstances, consideration could be given to further strengthening the
coordination process among the relevant agencies charged with financial stability.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ pre-emptive steps to tighten prudential regulations,
as well as their readiness to adopt new measures to upgrade the supervisory and
regulatory frameworks as they emerge from international consensus. They looked
forward to the forthcoming Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update.
Directors considered that strengthening domestic sources of growth would reduce
Korea’s vulnerability to economic downturns elsewhere in the world. They encouraged
the authorities to introduce bolder reforms to raise productivity in the nontradable sector,
including expediting a bank-led restructuring of troubled SMEs and opening up for
competition in the service sector. Increased labor market flexibility and social protection
would also help facilitate the rebalancing of the economy.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2010 Article IV Consultation with Korea is also available.

Korea: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–11
Projections
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

5.2
4.9
4.6
5.1
3.4
0.3
0.3

5.1
4.5
4.9
5.1
4.2
-0.3
0.7

2.3
1.4
0.8
2.0
-1.9
0.6
1.1

0.2
-3.2
0.8
1.2
-0.2
-3.8
3.1

6.1
6.4
3.4
2.6
5.3
2.7
0.2

4.5
3.3
2.9
3.3
1.9
0.4
1.5

908.7

975.0

1,026.5

1,063.1

1,154.1

1,249.7

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross domestic investment
Current account balance

30.2
29.6
0.6

30.0
29.4
0.6

30.6
31.2
-0.6

31.0
25.9
5.1

31.7
29.5
2.2

31.4
28.9
2.5

Prices (percent change)
CPI inflation (end of period)
Core inflation (average)
GDP deflator
Real effective exchange rate

2.1
1.8
-0.1
7.4

3.6
2.3
2.1
0.1

4.1
4.3
2.9
-19.9

2.8
3.6
3.4
-12.4

3.0
2.3
2.3
…

3.5
2.5
3.6
…

Trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

13.2
10.5
-6.6

10.4
9.0
-2.5

6.8
0.9
-14.3

0.0
-7.9
8.9

14.7
16.7
-2.9

9.3
7.9
0.4

Consolidated central government (in percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Excluding Social Security Funds

23.1
21.3
1.7
-1.2

25.0
21.5
3.5
0.4

24.4
23.3
1.2
-1.5

24.0
25.7
-1.7
-4.1

23.7
22.8
0.9
-1.4

23.5
22.0
1.5
-0.8

Money and credit (end of period)
Overnight call rate 2/
Three-year AA- corporate bond yield 2/
M3 growth (y/y, in percent) 3/

4.6
5.3
10.5

5.0
6.8
10.0

2.9
7.7
9.1

2.0
5.5
9.4

2.0
4.8
9.2

…
…
…

Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Oil imports
Current account balance
Gross international reserves (end of period) 4/
In percent of short-term debt (residual maturity) 4/

331.8
303.9
55.9
5.4
238.9
172.5

379.0
350.9
60.3
5.9
262.1
130.8

432.9
427.3
85.9
-5.8
201.1
105.3

373.6
317.5
52.9
42.7
269.9
138.2

459.9
409.6
68.6
22.4
280.3
144.0

510.2
446.5
72.9
27.4
294.0
152.2

External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Total external debt (end of period)
Of which: Short-term (end of period)
Total external debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service ratio 5/

260.1
113.7
27.3
7.4

383.2
160.2
36.5
7.5

377.9
149.9
40.5
10.2

401.9
150.0
48.3
10.5

402.0
149.1
40.0
9.1

400.5
147.7
36.8
8.4

Real GDP (percent change)
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Stock building 1/
Net foreign balance 1/
Nominal GDP (in trillions of won)

Sources: Korean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ Data for 2010 are as of August 2.
3/ Data for 2010 are as of May.
4/ Excluding gold.
5/ Debt service on medium- and long-term debt in percent of exports of goods and services.

Statement by Hi-Su Lee, Executive Director for Korea, Suk-Kwon Na, Senior Advisor
to the Executive Director, and Ji-Sung Moon, Advisor to the Executive Director
August 25, 2010
1.
The Korean economy, one of the economies leading the recovery from the financial
turmoil, has recorded rapid economic growth along with relatively stable employment and
price stability. The Korean authorities are now implementing a well-calibrated and gradual
exit strategy, while aiming to achieve strong and sustainable long-term economic growth.
2.
Our Korean authorities appreciate the staff’s constructive policy dialogue and will
give due consideration to the staff’s recommendations. This paper, a pilot initiative as part of
innovative reform of staff papers, is successful in streamlining the report and providing a
summary of major issues with regard to the Korean economy.
Economic Outlook and Risks
3.
A faster-than-projected recovery is expected. GDP growth rate in the first half of
2010 picked up to 7.6 % y-o-y, recording the highest growth rate in the past decade and thus
raising the Ministry of Strategy and Finance (MOSF)’s growth outlook in 2010 to 5.8%,
which is slightly lower than staff’s outlook of 6.1%. This recovery was underpinned by the
timely and decisive policy response of the authorities, and supported by solid growth of
private consumption and investment spurred by the strong rebound of exports. Employment
is expected to pick up more rapidly than expected. Inflation is expected to remain well within
the inflation target range, while the current account is likely to record a surplus of over USD
15 billion in 2010. Financial market conditions have also stabilized. The Korean stock
market gained more than 70 percent in value, while the nominal exchange rate appreciated
approximately 35 percent against the U.S dollar from their lows of March 2009. Foreign
exchange reserves have risen to USD 286 billion as of end-July 2010, surpassing pre-crisis
levels. Consumer confidence has rebounded and reached a seven-year high by end-2009,
while business confidence has also strengthened.
4.
Against the backdrop of this robust recovery, a calibrated exit from accommodative
macroeconomic policies is being implemented in a very cautious manner. The fiscal deficit
will be gradually reduced and will be eliminated between 2013 and 2014. Small and Medium
Enterprise (SME)-support measures are being gradually unwound. Liquidity support injected
into financial markets has been gradually reversed as well.
5.
Being an open economy, however, Korea remains vulnerable to external shocks. Its
large exposure to global trade and international capital markets always poses key risk to the
Korean economy. Accordingly, despite its small exposure to southern Europe, our authorities
have been closely monitoring and preparing for any negative spillovers from the European
financial crisis. Any adverse spillovers from the impact of major economies’ exit strategy as
well as a possible increase of global commodity prices will receive due and vigilant attention.

2

Fiscal Soundness and Consolidation
6.
The recent European crisis demonstrates the importance of fiscal soundness. For
ensuring fiscal soundness, the Korean government has developed the National Fiscal
Management Plan (NFMP) and the National Debt Management Plan (NDMP), the objectives
of which can be adjusted to accommodate economic and fiscal circumstances on a rolling
basis. With fiscal stimulus being gradually reduced, the fiscal deficit, which rose to 4.1% of
GDP during the crisis in 2009, is projected to drop to 2.7% in 2010 and will be eliminated
between 2013 and 2014, while the public debt to GDP ratio will stabilize at mid-30 percent
levels.
7.
Fiscal soundness will greatly help secure appropriate policy ammunition against
any future crises. To this end, the authorities will broaden the tax base by eliminating some
tax deductions/exemptions and will enhance expenditure efficiency by curtailing excessive or
overlapping expenditures. On the fiscal framework, the fiscal soundness management system
will be improved by periodic analysis of fiscal risks and reorganization of the fiscal statistics
infrastructure. The authorities are developing a new NFMP covering 2011-2015, which will
specify detailed measures for medium-term fiscal consolidation. In this context, a fiscal rule
recommended by staff will be introduced, if necessary.
8.
The recent debt increase of public enterprises is not likely to create fiscal burden on
the Korean economy. In the history of the Korean economy, public enterprises have
contributed to its dramatic economic growth by undertaking large scale infrastructure
investments. As of the end of 2009, public enterprises debt has increased by KRW 114
trillion from end-2005. However, their assets recorded an increase by KRW 137 trillion
during the same period, 20% higher than the debt increase. Given such large asset growth
and continued net annual profit of KRW 3.3 trillion on average since 2005, the recent debt
increase is not likely to create fiscal burden. Nevertheless, our authorities will closely
monitor the development of public enterprises’ debt levels, review their medium and long
term investment plans, and prepare for tailored debt management plans.
Monetary Policy Coordination and Objective
9.
Inflation has remained subdued despite the accommodative monetary policy. Core
inflation has continued to remain below 2 percent since February 2010. Headline inflation,
2.6 percent in July 2010, remains comfortably within the inflation target of 3±1 percent.
Against this backdrop, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) had maintained the policy
interest rate at 2 percent since February 2009. However, in July 2010, the MPC raised the
policy rate to 2.25 percent, reflecting the recent economic recovery.
10.
The MPC, as an independent policy-rates setter, determines the rate with
comprehensive consideration of economic circumstances, price pressure, and financial
market developments. The revision of the BOK Act in 1997 has served as the momentum to
significantly strengthen the independence of the Committee. For example, the Governor of
the Bank of Korea has been designated as the Chairman of the Committee. The Act ensured
the guaranteed term of the Committee members and also improved the independence of

3

budget and personnel affairs of the BOK. Given the need for continued policy coordination
with the government, the BOK Act still entitled the MOSF (Vice Minister) to attend the MPC
meeting and voice its view. Since January 2010, such attendance has resumed, after
consultation with the MPC, to meet the need for policy coordination among authorities. It
reflects the lessons from the crisis that cooperation between the government and central bank
is critical to cope with crisis. Some advanced countries like UK and Japan are also
implementing similar practice.
11.
Price stability has still been the primary and sole objective of the BOK. In the wake
of recent crisis, a revision to the BOK Act, making it pay attention to financial stability, is
being discussed in the National Assembly. Including financial stability as the central bank’s
additional policy goal is still contentious. As we recall, during the Board meeting on “Central
Banking Lessons from the Crisis" in June, it was highlighted that “assigning only one policy
instrument- the policy interest rate- to more than one objective would confront monetary
policy with sharp trade-offs and could well lead to a failure to achieve either objective”.
Since this is one of the highly controversial issues up until now, more careful and in-depth
review will be made before a final decision is reached.
Safeguarding Financial Sector Stability
12.
The two episodes of crisis experienced by Korea were mainly triggered by capital
flow volatility. A huge capital inflow during the economic boom and rapid capital outflow in
the subsequent downturn adversely affected the financial system and collapsed its economy.
Korea’s flexible exchange rate has thus far played the role of a shock absorber very well. But
more needs to be done. Against this backdrop, our authorities introduced strengthened
macro-prudential regulations in June 2010, such as limiting banks’ foreign currency forward
positions and tightening regulations for domestic foreign currency lending. This aims to
address the banks’ wholesale funding problem and to reduce currency and maturity
mismatches. The design and the degree of regulations will be revisited later following the
review of outcomes.
13.
Establishing the Financial System Stability Council (FSSC) was recommended by
staff. In Korea, however, there are various policy coordination channels among relevant
authorities and, in practice, policy coordination and information sharing among them
including BOK has been very successful, as was evidenced by its fast recovery from the
crisis. Moreover, Financial Services Commission (FSC) is very similar with the FSSC in
many aspects. All the relevant bodies (MOSF, BOK, Financial Supervisory Service (FSS),
and Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation (KDIC)) participate in the FSC as a commissioner,
and each body has analyzed systemic risks from its own perspective. As a result, Korean
authorities’ policies have been well-designed and successfully implemented in a coordinated
manner. More consideration to country-specific circumstance could have enhanced the
credibility of the staff’s recommendations.
14.
A cautious approach for so-called “Mega bank” is appropriate. Currently,
regulating the size of individual financial institution is being discussed by some advanced
countries. Country-specific circumstance, such as differences in terms of size of financial
agencies, the development stage of financial industry, and supervisory and regulation system,

4

should be carefully considered. Going forward, the Korean authorities will take a balanced
and cautious approach along with sufficient comparative analysis, with the main focus being
placed on enhancing the financial industry competitiveness as well as preventing systemic
risks.
Structural Reform
15.
Productivity-driven and balanced growth will be pursued. The policy focus is
shifting from overcoming crisis to preparing for the next challenge. “New Policy Goals
beyond the Crisis” was recently announced in this context. This elaborates mid- to long-term
comprehensive development strategies to achieve strong and sustainable long term growth.
To this end, revitalizing and increasing the competition in the non-tradable sector including
the service industry will be prioritized. In May 2009, our authorities launched a major
initiative to develop the service industry and selected nine service sectors based on their
growth potential and job creation as well as value added and trade deficit reduction. Up to
date, this initiative has been continuously implemented.
16.
Continued increase of household debt, in particular of mortgage debt, has seized
our authorities’ attention. Household debt remains higher than the average level of OECD
countries. Nevertheless, the majority of debt belongs to high-income households with a large
amount of financial assets. The delinquency rate on household loans remains very low,
recording 0.54% as of March 2010. Given the sufficient accumulation of provisions for bad
debts, banks remain resilient against shocks. However, as the rapid rise in household debt
and de-leveraging may dampen the economy’s growth potential, our authorities will remain
vigilant. Macro and micro prudential regulations such as Loan-to-Deposit ratio, Loan to
Value (LTV), and Debt to Income (DTI) will be continued. In addition, financial assistance
measures including micro-finance projects will reduce the financial burden of low income
families.
17.
Unlike the household, SMEs have sound balance sheet. Their financial soundness
was greatly improved since the financial crisis in 1997. The debt to equity ratio decreased
from 418% in 1997 to 137% in 2009, while equity to asset ratio rose from 19% in 1997 to
42% in 2009. Comparison with major economies also shows that financial soundness indices
of Korean SMEs are similar to or better than those of companies in major economies.
However, bank-led restructuring of troubled SMEs will be expedited, and the process of
restructuring will be continuously monitored. Most SMEs-support measures are being
normalized. The financial support measures, which are being maintained to sustain market
confidence and establish a safety net, will also be gradually unwound with due consideration
to market conditions.
18.
Improving the labor markets flexibility has been one of the key priorities, the
importance of which we cannot over-emphasize. To make labor markets more flexible,
employment protection for regular workers will be reduced while social protection for non
regular workers will be expanded. A great deal of efforts have been made to enhance the
flexibility of wages and working hours, such as creating jobs with reduced working hours as
well as expanding the Wage Peak. At the same time, the social safety net will be expanded to

5

facilitate employment stability, by enriching job training, upgrading employment support
service, and expanding coverage of employment insurance.
19.
The rapidly ageing population is one of the key challenges confronting Korea. It
has the lowest fertility rate among OECD member countries, which stands at 1.15 children
per woman in 2009. Its population over age of 65 is projected to increase from 11% in 2010
to 38.2% in 2050. In light of this, a five-year “Master Plan preparing for Ageing Society
(2011-2015)” is being envisaged as a comprehensive response. This Plan will focus on
boosting fertility rate by creating “work and family friendly” environment. Measures
supporting employment and turnover of older population will be strengthened, and promoting
public awareness on the importance of higher fertility rate will be enhanced.
Conclusion
20.
Finally, our Korean authorities wish to express their utmost appreciation to the Fund
and its staff for their policy advices in addressing the risks facing the country. They also
extend their deepest gratitude to the mission chief and his team, for their hard work as well as
frank advices in supporting the Korean economy.

