© 2010 International Monetary Fund

December 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/373

June 24, 2010
July 7, 2010
January 29, 2001
April 29, 2010
July xx, 2010
Liberia: 2010 Article IV Consultation and Fifth Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement
Under the Extended Credit Facility—Staff Report; Public Information Notice and Press
Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
Liberia.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2010 Article IV
Consultation with Liberia and fifth review under the three-year arrangement under the extended
credit facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the combined 2010 Article IV Consultation and Fifth Review Under the
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, prepared by a staff team of the
IMF, following discussions that ended on October 1, 2010, with the officials of Liberia on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on November 22, 2010. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its December 8, 2010 discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.



A statement by the Executive Director for Liberia.

The documents listed below have been separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Liberia
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of Sierra Leone
Technical Memorandum of Understanding
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LIBERIA
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Fifth Review Under the
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Doris C. Ross and Jan Kees Martijn
November 22, 2010
Overview: Strong macroeconomic policies, strengthened institutions, and debt relief have
stabilized the economy and supported confidence building. Many vulnerabilities remain. While
medium-term prospects are bright, notably in commodity export sectors, broad-based growth is
necessary to reduce high levels of under-employment and widespread poverty. To this end, future
commodity revenues will need to be channeled to infrastructure financing and capacity building to
enhance competitiveness. Financial sector development would help support the private sector.
Further reforms are necessary to remove structural impediments to growth, notably of property
rights and land tenure.
The 2010 Article IV discussions and fifth review of the ECF-supported program took place in
Monrovia September 21–October 1. The mission comprised of Mr. Lane (head),
Messrs. Oestreicher, Sobolev, and Yoon (all AFR), and Mr. Cipollone (SPR). Mr. Graham
(World Bank) joined the concluding discussions.
The mission met with Finance Minister Ngafuan, Central Bank Executive Governor Jones, senior
government officials and legislators, private sector and civil society representatives, and
development partners. The mission briefed President Johnson Sirleaf on its main findings.
Liberia’s exchange system is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions. The authorities have not yet accepted the obligations of Article VIII.
Past Surveillance: During the 2008 Article IV consultation, Directors stressed that continued fiscal
prudence, strengthened public financial management, and wide-ranging governance reforms would
be crucial to reach the HIPC Initiative completion point. With steadfast implementation of actions
in these areas, the authorities met the requirements of the completion point in June 2010. Directors
also stressed the importance of strengthening the banking system, rebuilding infrastructure, and
supporting private sector development to enhance competitiveness. While progress has been made
since 2008, particularly in regard of strengthening the banking system and attracting foreign direct
investment, further progress is needed in infrastructure rehabilitation and domestic private sector
development.
Program Performance: All performance criteria under the program through June 2010 were met.
Completion of two structural benchmarks faced some minor delays.

2
Contents

Page

Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................4
I.

Introduction and Recent Developments ............................................................................5

II.

Surveillance Issues ............................................................................................................7
A. Medium-Term Outlook and Risks ..........................................................................8
B. Competitiveness and External Stability Assessment..............................................9
C. Economic Impact of Foreign Direct Investment Projects ....................................13
D. Financial Sector Development .............................................................................16

III. Program Discussions.......................................................................................................18
A. Fiscal Policy .........................................................................................................18
B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies ...............................................................20
C. Structural Reforms and Poverty Reduction Strategy ...........................................21
D. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................22
E. Debt and External Policies ...................................................................................22
IV. Program Monitoring........................................................................................................23
V.

Staff Appraisal ................................................................................................................23

Boxes
1.
Incorporating Resource Models into the Macroeconomic Framework ..........................14
2. African Initiatives to Increase Access to Finance ...........................................................17
3.
The FY2011 Budget (July 2010–June 2011) ..................................................................19
Figures
1.
Recent Economic Developments, 2006–10 ....................................................................27
2.
Medium-Term Fiscal and Balance of Payments Outlook, FY2009–13 ..........................28
3a. Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under
Alternatives Scenarios, 2010/11–2030/31 ................................................................29
3b. Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternatives Scenarios, 2010/11–2030/31 ..................30
Tables
1.
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2008–12 ..................................................31
2.
Balance of Payments, 2008–12 .......................................................................................32
3a. Monetary Survey, 2008–12 (Millions of US Dollars) ....................................................33
3b. Monetary Survey, 2008–12 (Millions of Liberian Dollars) ............................................34
4a. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, FY2009–13 (Millions of US Dollars) ...35
4b. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, FY2009–13 (Percent of GDP) ..............36

3
5.
6.
7.
8.

Medium-Term Outlook, 2009–15 ...................................................................................37
Millennium Development Goals .....................................................................................38
Fund Credit Position and Projected Payments to the Fund, 2010–21.............................39
Schedule of Disbursements Under the ECF/EFF Arrangements, 2008–11 ....................40

Appendix I
Supplementary Letter of Intent ................................................................................................41
Attachment I. Supplementary Memorandum of Economic and
Financial Policies, 2010 ..........................................................................................42
Attachment II. Amendment to the Technical Memorandum of Understanding .............48

4
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AICD
ASYCUDA
CBL
DMC
ECF
ECOWAS
EPA
FDI
GDP
HIPC
IPD
MEFP
MFI
NDA
NPV
PC
PFM
PRS
SDR
SSA
TMU
UN
WAMZ
WTO

Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic
Automated System for Customs Data
Central Bank of Liberia
Debt Management Committee
Extended Credit Facility
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Partnership Agreement
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Import Permit Declaration
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
Microfinance Institutions
Net Domestic Assets
Net Present Value
Performance Criterion
Public Financial Management
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Special Drawing Rights
Sub-Saharan Africa
Technical Memorandum of Understanding
United Nations
West African Monetary Zone
World Trade Organization

5
I. INTRODUCTION AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
1.
Liberia’s post-conflict economic stabilization is now essentially complete. As
discussed in the remainder of this report, substantial vulnerabilities and challenges remain. The
requirements for the HIPC Completion Point were met in June 2010. Post completion point,
nominal public sector external debt amounts to 9 percent of GDP, assuming HIPC terms are
offered by remaining non-Paris Club creditors.
2.
The pace of economic growth is picking up after a slowdown in 2009 that was
related to spillovers from the global recession. The recovery is led by agriculture, notably the
rubber sector and the restart of commercial logging (Figure 1, Table 1).

12

Liberia - Contributions to Real GDP Growth
(Percent)

15

Liberia - Coincident Indicator
(Rate of Change, Q-o-Q)

Agriculture and f orestry
10

Mining

9

Manfacturing
5

Services
6

0

3

-5

0

2006
2007
Source: IMF staf f estimates.

2008

2009

Sources: Liberian authorities, and IMF staf f estimates.
Note: This indicator of activity combines seven monthly data
series (exports, rice imports, cement production, government
expenditure, broad money, and the L$/US$ exchange rate).

2010

3.
Terms of trade movements have been favorable. Inflationary pressure is easing due
to lower fuel and food prices, while rising commodity prices have contributed to a rebound in
rubber exports (Table 2).

20

Liberia - Inflation
(12 month average, y-o-y % change)

Liberia - Terms-of-Trade and Rubber Price
(Jan 2006 = 100)
200

15
150

10
5

100

0

Terms-of-trade
Rubber Price

50
Overall CPI

US dollar indexed CPI

Sources: Liberian authorities, and IMF staf f estimates.

Source: IMF staf f estimates.

6
4.
Higher net inflows of foreign exchange in 2010 have stabilized the exchange rate
and permitted a modest increase in reserves (Tables 3a–3b). Foreign direct investment (FDI)
commitments have increased substantially, as have estimated FDI inflows. The related increase
of imports is reflected in a higher current account deficit.

90

Liberia - Exchange Rate and
Net International Reserves

60

400

Liberia - Current Account Balance and FDI
(Percent of GDP)

40

300

L$/US$ (LHS)

L$/US$

NIR (RHS)

70

200

60

100

50

0

20

US$ millions

80

0
-20
-40
-60
2006

2007

2008

Current account

2009

2010

FDI

Source: IMF staf f estimates.

Source: Liberian authorities.

5.
Government revenue continued to rise in FY2010, and a balanced budget was
maintained despite a small shortfall in nontax revenue. Both revenue and expenditure
broadly achieved their programmed levels, but capital expenditure fell short by about
2 percentage points of GDP (Tables 4a–4b).
Fiscal Outturn
(Percent of GDP)

40

Current and Capital Expenditure for FY2010
(Percent of GDP)
40

30

Program

20

Outturn

30

10
20

0
-10

FY2008

FY2009
Total revenue and grants
Total Expenditure
Overall balance

Source: Liberian authorities.

FY2010

10
0
Capital
Source: Liberian authorities.

Current

7
6.
Structural reforms, economic legislation and concession agreements advanced.
Since the last Article IV consultation at end-2008, the authorities have instituted far-reaching
institutional and legal changes in public financial management, debt management, budget
process, tax policy, and tax administration. In the financial sector, a raft of legal and regulatory
improvements were implemented aimed at strengthening the sector’s stability, increasing
intermediation, and expanding access to financial services. The FY2011 budget for the year
starting in July was approved only in September; with the main budget parameters in line with
staff estimates. The Legislature also approved a new Commercial Code, an act to establish a
commercial court, and changes to the Revenue Code (approved in 2009) were finalized by the
Executive. Concessions in the iron ore and palm oil sectors, and a concession for port
management in Monrovia, were ratified. Offshore oil exploration rights were sold to a major oil
company, raising expectations of a discovery.
7.
Program implementation is broadly on track. All performance criteria and indicative
targets through June 2010 were observed. Four of five structural benchmarks were
substantively completed, one with a minor delay, while the remaining benchmark (publication
of national accounts) has been put back to early 2011 (see Attachment I, Supplementary
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) Tables 1a and 2).
II. SURVEILLANCE ISSUES
8.
With post-conflict economic stability and debt relief achieved, the challenge is to
direct Liberia’s reform momentum into a sustained push for broad-based development.
The authorities aim to achieve middle-income status through a new development strategy
“Liberia Rising 2030” stressing inclusive growth, capacity building, and infrastructure
investment. The strategy is at an early stage of preparation; it envisages large-scale foreign
investment in enclave sectors—notably iron ore and palm oil—with the resulting fiscal
revenues devoted to investment in essential infrastructure. The intention is to create “growth
corridors” integrating currently isolated areas and establishing links to international markets. It
is anticipated that costs will decline as additional roads, power, and ports come on stream. The
authorities expect this to motivate a significant expansion of private sector investment in the
non-enclave sectors of the economy, creating needed employment and, ultimately, broad-based
and rapid growth. They agreed with staff that continued implementation of governance
reforms—including in the rule of law, property rights, transparency, and tax
administration—could substantially reinforce the resulting improvement in the business
climate.
9.
Staff considers the outline of the development strategy to be well conceived and
appropriate to Liberia’s current situation. The consultations focused on competitiveness
issues, identifying structural impediments to growth, the impact of the iron ore and palm oil
concessions on the macro-economy and the budget, including their contribution to
infrastructure rehabilitation, and how to expand the role of the financial sector in supporting
growth.

8
A. Medium-Term Outlook and Risks
10.
Medium-term
Baseline medium-term projection
prospects remain favorable,
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
though heavily dependent on Real GDP growth (%)
6.3 8.8 11.7 8.4 7.1 7.0
the commencement of iron
Real GDP growth excl. mining (%)
6.3 6.6 6.5 6.0 5.8 4.3
Overall fiscal balance, incl. grants (% of GDP)
0.6 -0.5 -3.4 -4.5 -5.5 -5.3
ore and timber production
Overall fiscal balance, excl. grants (% of GDP)
-0.8 -6.4 -7.2 -8.7 -10.3 -10.3
(Figure 2 and Table 5). The
Current account, incl. grants (% of GDP)
-40.4 -59.2 -64.9 -74.9 -20.9 -13.8
Gross
official
reserves
(millions
of
US
dollars)
317 330 340 350 360 369
program baseline assumes
Months of imports of goods and services 1
2.6 2.0 2.0 1.9 2.6 2.6
continued sound
Months of imports of goods and services 2
3.1 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.9 2.9
Sources: Liberian authorities, and IMF staff estimates.
macroeconomic policies,
1/ Excluding UNMIL service imports.
broadly unchanged donor
2/ Excluding UNMIL service and FDI-related imports.
support, and ongoing political
stability. Growth is expected to recover to 6 percent in 2010, with an expansion of timber
production, and then accelerate further as iron ore exports begin in 2011. Over 2011–13, an
expansion of foreign investment-financed imports for the construction of mines is expected to
raise the external current account deficit substantially. But this effect should end by 2014, when
a reduction of imports and rising iron ore exports would allow a significant moderation in the
current account deficit. Inflationary pressure is expected to be contained over this period, as the
high import content of the FDI flows, lack of linkages between the enclave sectors and the rest
of the economy, and slack in the domestic employment market limit the potential for
overheating.
Liberia - Growth and Inflation
(Percent)

16

Liberia - Employment Structure
Urban
14%

12

Formal Sector
Rural
7%

8

Rural
48%

4

Urban
31%

0

Informal Sector

-4
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Enclave sectors (iron ore, rubber, timber)
Non-enclave sectors
Consumer prices (average)

Source: IMF staf f estimates and projections.

2015

Employment:
1,091,200
Population (15+):1,804,300
Source: Preliminary estimates f rom labor f orce survey
in Liberia f or 2008.

11.
Nonetheless, medium-term projections remain subject to significant risks. While
new agreements with foreign investors reduce downside risks to exports—indeed there is a
significant upside to the baseline scenario—Liberia remains vulnerable to fluctuations of
commodity prices that could lead to investor retrenchment and add to revenue volatility. At the
same time, there is a clear risk of “growth without development”1 where the revenues from the
1

Clower et al., Growth Without Development – An Economic Survey of Liberia, 1966 note: “…enormous growth
in primary commodities produced by foreign concessions for export has been unaccompanied either by structural

(continued)

9
enclave sectors are not effectively directed towards broad-based development objectives.
Additional risks include potential instability or a slowdown of reforms in advance of the end2011 presidential elections and the prospective post-election drawdown of UN security forces.
The potential discovery of offshore oil poses risks both on the upside (income) and downside
(governance).
B. Competitiveness and External Stability Assessment
12.
Quantitative, qualitative, and structural indicators of competitiveness were
discussed. The authorities broadly accepted the staff’s assessment that cost competitiveness is
a significant issue to be addressed over the medium term through a wide range of policy
actions. At the same time, exchange rate policy is unlikely to be a key factor due to the high
dollarization of the Liberian economy.
13.
The visible trade deficit has remained at, or over, 40 percent of GDP over the
period 2007–2010. Developments in the trade balance were dominated by FDI- and aid-related
imports and, to a lesser extent, by the expansion of exports of rubber. A very high deficit in
services, which averaged 50 percent of GDP, is also largely related to aid inflows. Liberia’s
trade deficit has been financed by official transfers and FDI. Total official transfers, excluding
UNMIL, and FDI averaged 50 percent and 25 percent of GDP, respectively.
14.
The current account deficit is high and volatile, but expected to moderate over the
medium term. The current account deficit weakened in 2008, when it reached almost
60 percent of GDP, mainly as a result of the fuel and food price shock raising imports and a
sharp increase in FDI that boosted imports of capital goods. In 2009, in the context of the
global recession, the current account balance improved as a reduction of FDI-financed imports
exceeded a parallel drop of rubber exports. In 2011–12, a projected strengthening of FDI would
lead to a renewed weakening of the current account, and the deficit is projected to remain above
50 percent of GDP. However, in the following years, both the trade and current account
balances are expected to improve as a result of the restart of timber, iron ore and later palm oil
exports. Export processing and import substitution remains very limited, even for many basic
commodities, and pointing to a need to improve the business environment.
15.
Although much improved, business climate and governance indicators point to
significant challenges for the creation of a competitive and diversified economy. Liberia
has made advances in the Doing Business Indicators, surpassing the fragile states average2 and

changes to induce complementary growth or by institutional changes to diffuse gains in real income among all
sectors of the population.”
2

Sub-Saharan Africa Fragile States as defined in the IMF sub-Saharan Africa Regional Economic Outlook:
Burundi, Central Africa, Comoros, Congo Dem Rep, Cote d'Ivoire, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia, Sao Tome, Sierra Leone, and Togo.

10
approaching the ECOWAS region average.3 Governance indicators have also improved, with
the gap against the ECOWAS average narrowing substantially, though weak administrative
capacity, a large number of administrative fees and procedures, and uncertain property rights
still represent serious obstacles to the increase of investment outside the natural resources
sector. Encouragingly, the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Survey shows a
substantial improvement in Liberia since 2008, with a 2010 ranking in the top five of subSaharan Africa (SSA).
ECOWAS - Governance Indicators
(Index, Increase signals improvement)

Liberia - Governance Indicators
(Index, Increase signals improvement)
70

70

Political stability
Government effectiveness
Regulatory Framework
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

60
50
40

50
40

30

30

20

20

10

10
0

0
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Doing Business Indicator
(Rank out of total countries)

2002

2009

Source: Worldwide Governance Indicators, World Bank.

2003

ECOWAS

Fragile States

2

160

1

2008

2009

Source: Doing Business Indicator, World Bank.

2010

2006

2007

2008

2009

Ecowas

SSA Fragile States

3

140

180

2005

Liberia - Corruption Perception Index
(Scale, Increase signals improvement 1 )
Liberia

Liberia

2004

Source: Worldwide Governance Indicators, World Bank.

4

100
120

Political stability
Government effectiveness
Regulatory Framework
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

60

0
2008
2009
Source: Transparency International.
1Maximum rating is 10.

2010

16.
The authorities considered that progress in improving the business environment
has been substantial, but that more was clearly needed. Given the high level of
dollarization, the consensus was that any action to improve competitiveness would need to
involve productivity gains, including through removing bureaucratic, legal and physical
obstacles rather than exchange rate adjustment. Other factors contributing to the lack of
competitiveness of local production were considered to be the small size of the domestic
market, weak trade links with neighboring countries, and high transport costs. The authorities

3

Economic Community of West African States: Benin, Burkina, Cape Verde, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea (suspended), Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger (suspended), Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.

11
expected that ongoing regional trade integration within ECOWAS, WTO accession, and better
transport infrastructure would eventually improve the situation.
17.
The authorities also noted that competitive labor costs were a positive factor in the
external stability assessment. While information is limited, staff recognized that labor costs,
especially unskilled labor, were competitive in a regional and global context, although these
benefits were more than offset by higher non-labor costs for goods and services inputs.
18.
A preliminary real exchange rate assessment using the Consultative Group
(CGER) methodologies indicated a moderate overvaluation in the medium term. The
macroeconomic balance approach points to an overvaluation between 12 and 15 percent
depending on the estimated parameters.
Macroeconomic Balance Approach
(dependent variable current account/GDP)
I

II

III

Fiscal balance/GDP (rel. to trading partners)
Old age dependency
Population growth (rel. to trading partners)
Initial NFA/GDP
Oil balance/GDP
Per capita growth (rel. to trading partners)
Relative income

0.20
-0.14
-1.21
0.02
0.23
-0.21
0.02

0.283

1.04

0.048
0.319
-0.437

0.18

CA Norm (percent of GDP)
Underlying CA projection (percent of GDP)1/
Current Account Gap (percent of GDP)
Real Exchange Rate gap (percent) 2/

0.1
-18.0
18.1
-15.4

0.07
-2.4
-18.0
15.6
-13.2

-3.3
-18.0
14.7
-12.5

1/

The underlying current account projection is based on WEO projections up to 2015.
Appreciation (depreciation) needed in the real exchange rate to close the gap between the norm and the
underlying. The calculation is based on a medium-term elasticity of 0.44, which assumes the CGER
elasticity weighted by the ratios of exports and imports of goods and services in 2015.

2/

19.
The external stability approach calculates that Liberia’s medium-term net foreign
assets (NFA) would stabilize with a current account deficit of 9 percent of GDP. The
difference between the underlying current account balance and the NFA-stabilizing current
account balance is translated, as in the macroeconomic balance approach, to the required real
exchange rate adjustment, by using the global trade balance elasticity.4 Since the NFAstabilizing current account deficit is smaller than the underlying current account deficit, the real
exchange rate adjustment needed to close the gap is calculated to be about 8 percent.

4

The current account that would stabilize the NFA at this level is determined as follows:
CAs
g Π 1 g / 1 g 1 Π bs, where: CAS = stabilizing level of the current account balance to GDP,
g = the estimated growth rate of real GDP, Π =estimated inflation, bS= stable net foreign asset to GDP ratio.

12
External Stability Approach
(percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Medium Term 2/

Net foreign
asset position1/

Growth
(percent)

Underlying
Current
Account

-9.0

8.0

-18.0

Sustainable
Current
Account

Gap

-8.3

9.7

Depreciation
in the real
exchange
rate
(percent)
-8.5

1/ Assumes a stabilizing net foreign position of -9.0 percent of GDP.
2/ The calculation is based on a medium-term elasticity of 0.31, which assumes the CGER elasticities weighted by the ratio of exports
and imports of goods and services in 2009.

20.
Overall, the economy’s resilience to exogenous shocks has improved. The 2009
SDR allocation substantially strengthened reserve adequacy. A projected decline in the
reserves to imports ratio from 2.6 months in 2009 to 2.0 months over 2011–13 results from a
strong expansion of imports financed by FDI in the iron ore sector. Import coverage
excluding FDI-related imports would drop to 2½ months coverage 2011–13 and then is
projected to rise to 2.9 months in 2014–15. A revised debt sustainability analysis confirms
that all debt indicators remain well below policy-related thresholds, except the historical
scenario (Figures 3a–3b).5
Structural Impediments to Growth
21.
Several structural elements impede competitiveness and growth outside of the
enclave sectors. These factors were identified on the basis of in-depth diagnostic studies by
the authorities and/or international partners. The authorities noted that full or partial
strategies to overcome these barriers are being implemented. Staff believe that more
ambitious efforts may be required. The consensus on structural impediments to growth
centered on:


Inadequate infrastructure. Roads, ports, energy and water supply are in very poor
condition or not available. For example, energy costs are three times the African
average, which deters both production and trade. Road paving ratios are
comparatively low and entire regions of the country are inaccessible by land during
the rainy season. A multi-donor diagnostic of infrastructure needs has been completed
(see section C on meeting infrastructure financing needs).



Insecurity of land tenure. An inadequately defined and enforced legal
framework—a combination of civil laws and customary arrangements—and an
inadequate land administration has resulted in irregular occupation of land and

5

The historical scenario is not considered a reliable indicator of potential debt distress as it is based on a limited
set of historical data from the immediate post-conflict period 2004/05 to 2007/08 with very high current account
deficits.

13
endemic land disputes. The use of the Eminent Domain Law to demarcate
concessions land area is also controversial as, historically, concessionaires have only
used a small fraction of the land granted. The creation of a Land Commission in 2009
to advise on the resolution of disputes and improve land titling and registry was an
important step forward. However, as the Commission does not have binding authority
for dispute resolution, the authorities may need to consider more far-reaching
legislative reform to speed up progress in this important area.


Financial sector development. Comparatively low financial intermediation and a
narrow range of financial products substantially curtail financing for the private
sector. Building on improvements in the legal and regulatory framework, the
authorities are looking for creative solutions to expand access to the financial sector,
through structured SME lending, microfinance, and mobile banking (further
discussed in Section D) and, over the medium term, to develop the capital market.



Limited implementation capacity. Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS)
implementation reports identify limited domestic implementation capacity as the most
important constraint to achieving PRS targets. While numerous initiatives exist to
augment capacity, many are time-bound and externally financed. Accordingly, the
authorities have prepared a National Capacity Development Strategy to address
long-term capacity building needs.



Fragility of peace. Unmet expectations from the “peace dividend” and the
persistence of tensions among numerous tribal groups and between indigenous
Liberians and Americo-Liberians could lead to renewed instability and reignite
conflict.6 UN police and military forces assist in maintaining security, while the
authorities have sustained external support in three targeted areas: strengthening the
rule of law; security sector reform; and supporting national reconciliation.
C. Economic Impact of Foreign Direct Investment Projects

22.
The potential macroeconomic impact of foreign investment concessions in the
iron ore and palm oil sectors is large. Staff developed financial models to assess the effects
of the investments on growth, revenue, and the balance of payments (Box 1). Medium-term
fiscal projections incorporating concession revenues were used to analyze the scope to meet
infrastructure development needs.

6

Source: US Government Liberia: Interagency Conflict Assessment Report (2010, unpublished).

14
Box 1: Incorporating Resource Models into the Macroeconomic Framework
Staff derived estimates of the macroeconomic impact of foreign direct investment in the iron
ore and palm oil sectors.


Six ratified foreign investment concessions, four in iron ore and two in palm oil, were
modeled. Model outputs included physical production, fiscal revenue, exports, foreign and
domestic labor income, profit transfer, capital flows.

Outputs from the financial models were incorporated into the baseline macroeconomic
framework.


Four scenarios were considered: the program baseline (three concessions); a high case (five
concessions); a best case (six concessions); and a low case with only palm oil concessions
and no iron ore production.



Borrowing was held to the level programmed at the time of the fourth review of the
ECF-supported program: up to 3 percent of GDP per year while keeping the external debt
stock below 30 percent of GDP (both expressed in net present value terms); while budget
grants were held constant at 5 percent of baseline GDP in all scenarios. To accommodate
rising health and education spending, non-interest current expenditure was assumed to
increase in real terms by about 5 percent each year.



All resources available after current spending were assumed to be devoted to capital
investment, i.e. capital spending is determined by available resources not calculated needs.
The framework does not explicitly assume absorption constraints. However, the focus of the
analysis is on a ten-year period (2011-20). Operational and implementation capacity issues
would likely affect the specific annual path and the rate of investment scale up.

The macroeconomic framework incorporated a feedback effect where the increase in
infrastructure capital stock was assumed to raise productivity in the non-enclave sectors, boosting
production.

23.
Potential revenues are substantial and
the revenue profile is back-loaded within the
period 2011–20. Back-loading results from
lengthy pre-production investment periods, while
profits and therefore corporate tax revenues are
significant only after capital is fully depreciated.
The palm oil contribution to revenue is negligible
up to 2020 (it takes 5 years for oil palms to grow
to maturity).

2.5

Liberia: Cumulative Iron Ore and Palm Oil
Revenue, FY2011-20
(Billions of US dollars)
Palm oil

2.0

Iron ore

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Low case

Base case

Source: IMF staf f estimates.

High case

Best case

15
24.
The growth impact is also significant. There is a direct effect resulting from the
operations of the concessions. There is also a smaller, indirect effect from the assumed
increase of publicly-financed infrastructure projects financed by concessions revenues. The
resulting increase in the capital stock is assumed to raise output in the non-enclave sector
through a feedback mechanism.

2.0

Liberia: Real GDP, 2011-20
(Billions of constant US dollars)
1.0

Low case

Contribution to Current Account Balance
by Iron Ore Projects, 2011-20
(Billions of US dollars)
Baseline

Base case

1.5

High case

0.5

High case
Best case

Best case

0.0

1.0

-0.5

0.5

-1.0
2011

0.0
2011

2014

Source: IMF staff.estimates.

2017

2014

2017

2020

2020
Source: IMF staf f estimates.

25.
The concessions would substantially strengthen the balance of payments position
over the medium to long term. The initial direct impact on the external current account is
projected to be highly negative, reflecting the investment phase of the projects. As
production expands, the balance of payments impact will turn positive, despite large profit
transfers. This positive contribution represents the share of value added accruing to
government and domestic labor net of additional imports of goods and services.
26.
Over the next ten years, meeting Liberia’s
infrastructure needs would require at least
US$3.7 billion (382 percent of 2010 GDP). This is the
conclusion of the multi-stakeholder Africa Infrastructure
Country Diagnostic (AICD), completed in 2010, which
covered roads, power, ports, water and sanitation, and
telecommunications, but excluding ports that are
assumed to be privately financed.

Liberia: Total Infrastructure need, FY2011-20
(Billions of US dollars)
Total infrastructure need

3.7

Roads

1.1

Water and Sewerage

0.8

Water

0.5

Sanitation

0.4

Power

1.3

Generation

0.9

Transmission and distribution

0.5

Other

0.5

Source: Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic.

27.
Funding the costs of the infrastructure program could be greatly facilitated by
revenue from concessions over the medium term.


Financing for infrastructure is assumed to come from three main sources: concession
revenues, donor support in grant form, and concessional borrowing consistent with
the authorities’ debt management strategy.

16




Medium-term fiscal projections
indicate that in all but a low case
scenario—which assumed no iron
ore activity after 2010—the
infrastructure program is largely
affordable. In the baseline
scenario, a cumulative financing
gap of US$0.4 billion remains, but
nearly 90 percent of the
infrastructure investment could be
financed over the ten year period.

Liberia Infrastructure Financing Gap,
FY2011-20
(Cumulative in billions of US dollars)
1.0

0.5

0.5

0.7

0.0
-0.5

-0.4

-1.0
-1.5
-2.0

-1.9

-2.5
Low case

Base case

High case

Best case

A debt sustainability analysis indicates that filling the residual financing gap in the
baseline case through concessional borrowing appears viable. But debt would rise
above the vulnerability thresholds if loans were at market rates and maturities.

28.
The emergence of a financing gap in the baseline scenario is indicative of the
need to intensify reform in other areas. The authorities noted that improvements in tax
administration—omitted from the staff’s framework—could provide additional resources; as
would their intention to develop a public investment plan to mobilize and redirect aid to
priority areas. The authorities also noted that public sector wage pressures remain strong and
could undercut efforts to increase investments. Staff observed that in light of the revenue
profile, some back-loading of the infrastructure program would also be necessary, and might
be advisable if anticipated improvements in capacity did not materialize rapidly. Improving
the quality of expenditure through better planning and implementation would also yield
potential savings.
D. Financial Sector Development
29.
The financial sector is not yet in a position to support growth on the scale that is
needed due to relatively low financial intermediation and private sector lending.
Substantial progress has been made to expand the banking system, particularly from the
expansion into Liberia of other African banks, and the financial intermediation gap between
Liberia and the SSA is closing. However, the banking system has significant excess liquidity,
and lending to the private sector is limited relative to peer country groups. Small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) have particular difficulties in accessing credit. This is mainly due to the
weak legal and judicial framework, the limited capacity of commercial banks to appraise
SMEs, and high bank operating costs. Interest rate spreads are also high and maturities short
term.

17

80

60

Liberia - M2/GDP
(Percent)

80

Sub-Saharan Af rica
ECOWAS
Liberia

Liberia - Private Sector Credit/GDP
(Percent)
Sub-Saharan Af rica
ECOWAS
Liberia

60

40

40

20

20

0

0
2005
2006
2007
Source: IMF staf f estimates.

2008

2009

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Source: IMF staf f estimates.

30.
The range of financial services available remains narrow despite improvements.
Weak physical infrastructure impedes expansion of the banking system and limits the range
of services. Rudimentary payment and settlement systems reduce the benefits of using the
banking system while the nonbank sector—particularly microfinance, leasing, insurance, and
pensions—remains underdeveloped. However, increased competition from new bank entrants
is leading to the introduction of new services including e-banking, automated teller machines,
and mobile money (see below).
31.
Financial sector development priorities should aim to complete ongoing reforms
to the legal and institutional framework, encourage a broader range of financial
services, and support increased access to finance. Upgrading the payments system and
implementing recent legislation creating a commercial court are likely the most urgent tasks.
The authorities are interested in exploring innovative approaches to expanding access to
finance. To this end, staff suggested that successful initiatives in other countries for mobile
banking, microfinance, and structured SME lending could be replicated in Liberia (Box 2).
Box 2. African Initiatives to Increase Access to Finance
Mobile financial services. A rapid expansion of low-cost mobile telephone usage in Liberia
suggests mobile financial services have a high growth potential. Recent experience in Kenya
and Uganda reported by Fund technical assistance experts suggests that around half of mobile
phone users use mobile money transfer services, far more than use the banking system. A South
African Company, MTN, is expanding mobile banking to about 20 countries in sub-Saharan
Africa including to its Liberian subsidiary, Lonestar. Mobile money transfer services in
Liberian dollars were launched in April 2010 in collaboration with the largest commercial bank
in Liberia. Transactions are minimal so far. While an opportunity for financial sector
development, it also poses challenges for the monetary authorities including oversight, IT
security and identity verification, while geographical coverage needs further expansion to rural
areas.

18
Box 2. African Initiatives to Increase Access to Finance (concluded)
Structured SME financing. In Ghana, key bottlenecks to SME financing were tackled in a World
Bank financed program through: partial credit guarantees for SME loan portfolios;
performance-based grants for banks participating in an IFC credit facility; and technical assistance to
SMEs. The project reports improved SME access to finance and the creation of 2,000 formal sector
jobs over the 12 months to April 2009.
Microfinance institutions (MFIs). The experiences of Ethiopia, Ghana, and Tanzania show that
MFIs can play an effective role in broadening financial access through extending microcredit to rural
inhabitants. Cross-country data suggests there is considerable scope to expand access and financing
through MFIs in Liberia.
Average Loan Size per Borrower in MFIs (US$, as of end-2009)
Ethiopia
Ghana
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Tanzania
118
255
57
187
77
Source: Microfinance Information Exchange (http://www.mixmarket.org).

32.
The authorities broadly share the staff’s assessment of financial sector
development priorities. The authorities intend to elaborate an overarching strategy
document consolidating the existing initiatives and indicating areas for further attention. This
would promote the financial sector as a pillar of the growth and poverty reduction strategy.
The financial sector strategy is intended to complement the CBL’s annual policy statement
and to benchmark progress over a longer-term perspective.
III. PROGRAM DISCUSSIONS
A. Fiscal Policy
33.
Budget execution in FY2010 successfully adjusted to revenue shortfalls, but at
some cost to the development program. The authorities adopted a risk management plan, a
program of expenditure cuts set up in response to anticipated shortfalls in budget revenues.
The program was widely discussed within government prior to implementation, but spending
units nonetheless lacked the capacity to rapidly adapt cash plans to changing circumstances.
A number of capital projects were delayed, cancelled, or replaced by current expenditure,
leading to a 2 percent of GDP shortfall of capital spending relative to the fiscal program.
Staff noted that this outturn suggested a pressing need to develop greater expertise in
expenditure planning and according a higher priority to capital spending at all levels.
34.
The FY2011 budget is closely aligned with program parameters and represents a
significant improvement over the FY2010 budget process (Box 3 and MEFP ¶5–6). Fiscal
policy is anchored by the debt management strategy which limits borrowing to 3 percent of
GDP in net present value terms. Budget preparation followed the new PFM law, and included
a medium-term context, a budget framework paper, and a state enterprise reporting annex.

19
However, the delays encountered during discussion of the budget by the Legislature and
finalization by the executive branch through end-October 2010 undermined cash
management and planning. In the interim period, expenditure of ministries and agencies was
held to one twelfth of the previous year’s level. While this provided sufficient funds to avoid
serious disruption, staff noted that this outcome was fortuitous, and urged the authorities to
work closely with the Legislature to avoid a repetition next year.
Box 3: The FY2011 Budget, July 2010–June 2011
Tax policy changes lower revenue.


To address perceived over-taxation of
formal sector enterprises and deliver on
2009 pledges to wage earners the top
personal and corporate income tax rates
were reduced from 35 to 25 percent. The
net revenue effect is partly offset by
higher taxes or excises on alcohol,
airlines, cell phone usage, and hotels.

Fiscal Operations of the Central Government,
FY2010–11
(Percent of GDP)
FY2010
FY2011
Outturn
Budget
Revenue and grants
Tax revenue
Non-tax revenue
Grants
Expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

31.0
22.4
7.3
1.4
30.4
27.0
12.3
3.4
0.6

35.3
20.2
9.2
5.9
35.8
27.5
13.8
8.3
-0.5



Nontax revenue is budgeted to increase
by almost 2 percentage points of GDP,
mainly due to additional one-off
payments for new iron ore concessions,
and for an oil exploration license that
has already been received.



Domestic financing occurs through a drawdown of government deposits. The budget included no
provision for borrowing.



Delays in disbursing general budget support from FY2010 leads to an increase of grants in
FY2011.

Capital expenditure increases in line with revenue and financing.


The increase in resources will be devoted to capital expenditure, bringing the budgeted increase in
capital spending over the 2009/10 outturn to almost 5 percentage points of GDP. Investment is
concentrated in public works, education and health. The underlying increase of capital spending is
close to 3 percent of GDP, as FY2010 spending was held back by revenue shortfalls.



The wage bill is set to rise 1½ percentage points of GDP over the FY2010 outturn due to the
regularization of the education and health payroll (7,000 additional teachers and nurses) and
selective increases to security forces.

The authorities anticipate tabling a supplementary budget early in 2011, in consultation with Fund
staff, if additional revenues materialize or concessional funding is identified.

35.
Staff broadly supported the main FY2011 budget parameters, while noting
implementation risks. Both tax and nontax revenue projections appeared realistic, given the
first quarter outturn. Staff considered the increase in the wage bill to be sustainable, and

20
necessary to lay the foundation for improved service delivery in health, education, and
security. The main risks to implementing the capital budget are capacity constraints that
could slow project implementation and delays that could occur if budget support were not
disbursed on a timely basis.
36.
Over the medium term, capital spending is expected to increase substantially,
funded largely by iron ore taxation and concessional borrowing. With a large projected
increase of investment, capacity and quality of investment issues loom large—the authorities
are beginning to develop their planning capabilities but may find it difficult to deliver the
desired scale up without extensive support from partners and the private sector. Staff
considers that an annual real increase of non-interest current expenditure of about 5 percent
could accommodate significant increases in other priority spending. Combined with a
moderate increase of interest spending, total current expenditure is programmed to stabilize
as a percent of GDP. Changes in tax policy are at the planning stage.7 Future tax
administration improvements could support revenue growth. A review of nuisance taxes, fees
and charges is expected to reduce business compliance costs.
B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies
37.
Monetary policy continues to aim at containing excessive volatility of the
exchange rate. Pressure for exchange rate depreciation against the US dollar has
substantially reduced since early-2010. The CBL has tailored foreign exchange auction sales
to market conditions to contain volatility, while achieving a modest increase in the net
foreign exchange position (MEFP ¶9).
38.
Liquidity monitoring remains
Liberia - Financial Soundness Indicators
important. The banking sector remains highly 40
4
liquid with vault cash and excess required
reserves equivalent to 45 percent of total
20
2
commercial deposits as of end-June 2010.
0
0
Accordingly, net domestic assets of the CBL
Return on Assets (RHS)
are slightly below projections, reflecting
Capital Adequacy Ratio (LHS)
-20
-2
Non-performing Loan Ratio (LHS)
higher-than-anticipated commercial bank
Return on Equity (LHS)
deposits at the CBL. The foreign exchange
-40
-4
auction functions to mop up some excess
liquidity, in the absence of domestic capital
Source: Liberian authorities.
and interbank markets, but the use of this
instrument is limited by reserve accumulation objectives. The anticipated launch of the local
currency treasury bill market will add a new liquidity management instrument. The
7

The authorities intend to adopt the ECOWAS Common External Tariff, and are considering improvements to
the fiscal regimes governing the forestry and petroleum sectors and the eventual adoption of a VAT.

21
immediate challenge for the CBL is to improve its liquidity monitoring and forecasting
capacity. Staff reiterated the need for improved collaboration and information sharing
between the CBL and the MoF.
39.
Banking sector profitability remains low. All banks respect the required prudential
ratios. The increase of the minimum capital requirement to US$10 million by end-December
2010 will further contribute to financial stability in the banking sector. Nonetheless, staff
raised concerns about the continued low profitability of the system. This is attributable to
high operating and overhead costs relative to income and, possibly, enhanced competition
from new entrants. Staff noted that the CBL lowered the minimum general provisions for
loan loss to 1 percent from 2 percent in August 2010 to provide incentives for extending new
loans.
40.
Maintaining adequate foreign exchange reserve coverage is an important
element of confidence building in the financial sector and for the Liberian dollar. The
imminent introduction of the local currency treasury bill market may eventually help boost
demand for Liberian dollars. Replacing damaged or mutilated bank notes in circulation and
issuing higher-denomination notes could be considered, although the authorities are
concerned about possible adverse effects on inflation expectations from higher-denomination
notes. The CBL has drawn on its reserve account (balances resulting from currency gains) to
finance the rehabilitation of its headquarters during 2010–11. The resulting expenditure in
foreign exchange can be accommodated through the margin against reserve targets in the
monetary program (amounting to US$16 million at end-June 2010) but should not undermine
the objective of a gradual build-up of foreign exchange reserves.
41.
Meaningful progress has been made in strengthening internal financial controls
at the CBL. Based on the 2008 safeguards assessment recommendation, the CBL has been
building up internal audit capacity and reached a position to carry out semi-annual data
audits. Staff supported a handover of the audit for the monetary data reporting package to the
internal audit section of the CBL from the second half of 2010 (MEFP ¶10).
C. Structural Reforms and Poverty Reduction Strategy
42.
The delivery of structural reforms monitored as benchmarks under the program
has generally proceeded satisfactorily although publication of national accounts is delayed
to early 2011 (MEFP ¶7–8 and ¶12):


Trade facilitation has been enhanced by the introduction of a short negative list of
goods requiring an import permit declaration (IPD) from the Ministry of Commerce
(fuel and selected chemicals, explosives, hazardous waste, cultural artifacts, obscene
materials, military vehicles, and aircraft). Previously all imports required signed
permits that were regarded as an impediment to trade by business councils.

22


The CBL publicized regulations for treasury bill auctions to those eligible to
participate, setting the stage for intra-year budget financing of the FY2011 budget.



The Ministry of Finance pays all government civil servants in Monrovia by direct
bank transfer, as well as civil servants in 7 of the other 14 counties. This reduces the
scope for check fraud and fiscal losses, and encourages use of banking services.



A computerized asset registry has been compiled for 85 of the 89 ministries and
agencies substantively completing the exercise. The omissions concern ministries that
have assets in the counties that are logistically difficult to cover. This has enhanced
transparency and made ministries and agencies more accountable for the loss of
public property.



Data problems, including estimation of the informal sector and dual currency
reporting, have delayed the publication of validated national accounts from
September 2010 to February 2011.

43.
Other structural reforms advance and new priorities are emerging.
Implementation of the Public Financial Management Act is continuing, but additional efforts
are required to ensure that the transition to improved public accounting and reporting is
completed by June 2011. Continued vigilance is needed in the areas of public procurement,
fiscal terms of concessions, and external audit. There is an urgent need to strengthen the
capacity to evaluate and select projects as an input to the medium-term expenditure
framework, to develop the system of internal audit, and to strengthen expenditure and cash
management.
44.
The second year implementation report of the Poverty Reduction Strategy
covering the period to April 2010 reports improved implementation (MEFP ¶13). The
implementation rate of deliverables increased from 20 percent in the first year to 80 percent
in the second year. In recognition that some of the third year deliverables will not be
achieved by mid-2011, the PRS has been extended to end-2011.
D. Statistical Issues
45.
Weaknesses in the national accounts and the balance of payments statistics
hamper surveillance. These issues are discussed in the accompanying Informational Annex.
Financing and technical assistance from the Fund and other agencies is being provided to
upgrade statistical capacity in these areas.
E. Debt and External Policies
46.
Following the HIPC completion point reached in June 2010, Liberia has a low
risk of debt distress. The recent agreement with Paris Club creditors on the full cancelation
of the remaining debt will further reduce debt vulnerabilities; and the authorities are working

23
on bilateral agreements with Paris Club creditors, intending to finalize them no later than
March 2011. They are also committed to seek comparable treatment from remaining bilateral
and commercial creditors. Negotiations continue with remaining non-Paris Club bilateral
creditors. A debt buyback funded by the World Bank managed Debt Reduction Facility was
completed with the final two remaining commercial creditors in November 2010. The Debt
Management Committee is fully operational, and over the coming months intends to issue
guidelines for new borrowing and government guarantee requests, and to initiate and assess
proposals for investment projects that could be eligible for external concessional financing
(MEFP ¶4).
47.
Efforts have intensified to advance multilateral and regional trade arrangements
(MEFP ¶11). Following the request for membership in 2007, Liberia has recently become an
observer at the WTO. The authorities have indicated that their Memorandum on the Foreign
Trade Regime has been finalized and will be sent to the WTO secretariat by end-2010. They
expect to conclude the membership process in 2012. The authorities also finalized the
Liberian trade strategy, required for the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the
European Union. Together with other ECOWAS members, Liberia remains committed to the
adoption of the common external tariff, according to the agreed migration plan, which has
been a key obstacle so far to the finalization of the regional EPA.
IV. PROGRAM MONITORING
48.
No changes to program conditionality are proposed. The Technical Memorandum
is amended to reflect changes in the program path of concession payments for March and
June 2011 (Attachment II).
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
49.
Sound macroeconomic policies, strengthened institutions, and debt relief have
stabilized the economy and supported confidence building. Alongside these
improvements, implementation of the PRS has improved markedly in the year to April 2010.
Economic growth is recovering after a slowdown from global financial crisis spillovers.
Improvements in the terms of trade have supported exports and moderated import price
inflation. The global economic recovery, buttressed by the completion of HIPC Initiative
debt cancellation, has supported confidence, as evidenced by a surge of new foreign
investment commitments, and raised underlying growth potential.
50.
While medium-term growth prospects are bright for commodity exports, huge
developmental challenges remain. The authorities have finalized investment agreements
with several multinational investors in iron ore mining, palm oil production, and offshore oil
exploration. These investments, particularly iron ore, will significantly improve fiscal
revenues over the medium term, especially after 2015. Outside the enclave sectors major
growth and development challenges remain.

24
51.
Fiscal policies have hitherto supported the stabilization effort and will need to be
tuned to the development challenges ahead. The zero new borrowing policy supported
debt reduction, reserve accumulation, and exchange rate stability and provided breathing
space to strengthen planning capacity, public financial management, and debt management
capabilities. The authorities have taken a prudent approach to borrowing post-debt
relief—with no provision for new borrowing in the FY2011 budget—and debt management
policies are significantly enhanced. However, the authorities’ preparedness for a desired
scale-up of public investment spending is far from complete, and may slow the pace of
implementation. A concerted effort will be needed within the government, along with
effective engagement from bilateral and multilateral partners, to identify and implement
strategic infrastructure projects.
52.
The revisions to the revenue code are welcome, following lengthy delays in
finalizing the legislation. To counter the perception that the tax burden on the private sector
is large, the authorities will review and streamline nuisance taxes and various user fees and
regulatory charges. Attention should also be given to ensuring that the fiscal terms of new
concession agreements are in accordance with the revenue code. Wage and employment
pressure is becoming evident and risks crowding out public investment if not tackled in
future budgets.
53.
The scope for an active monetary policy remains limited due to high levels of
dollarization and the lack of monetary instruments. Confronted by sustained external
pressures, flexibility of the exchange rate has helped, to some extent, in dealing with shocks.
Introducing some variation in foreign exchange sales has contributed to reducing exchange
rate volatility. The introduction of treasury bill auctions expected in FY2011 will eventually
create a new liquidity management tool. While confidence building should in time support
greater use of the Liberian dollar, in the interim, practical measures to enhance use of the
Liberian dollar as a means of payment are needed. A gradual build-up of foreign exchange
reserves should continue.
54.
The exchange rate has a minor role to play in ensuring external stability and
competitiveness due to high dollarization. Quantitative measures and qualitative indicators,
notably limited import substitution and undiversified exports, suggest that cost
competitiveness is a significant issue in Liberia. The expansion of commodity exports over
the medium term would bolster incomes and take Liberia a long way towards external
stability. Indications of moderate overvaluation of the real exchange rate over the medium
term need to be treated cautiously due to data limitations and major ongoing structural
changes.
55.
The economic and fiscal impact of the concessions is expected to be large. Staff
analysis indicates that the FDI investments in concessions will boost income growth and
fiscal revenues while strengthening the balance of payments, notwithstanding large factor

25
payments abroad. However, the concessions are unlikely to generate the scale of job creation
needed to absorb the growing, young, and under-employed labor force.
56.
Structural impediments to growth outside the concessions sector are significant.
There is a consensus that the main developmental challenges also affect competitiveness and
external stability. They are: infrastructure rehabilitation; financial sector development;
capacity building; defining and enforcing property rights; and maintaining security. The
diagnostics of these problems by the authorities and development partners are strong. In
some areas, the authorities have or are developing strategies for overcoming these barriers to
growth, notably in capacity building, infrastructure, and financial sector development. The
resolution of property rights issues–which is fundamental to production, investment and
security issues—is seen as very difficult. Initial steps have been taken, and more are needed.
57.
Accelerating infrastructure development is a top priority. The pace of both
public- and private-financed infrastructure development has not nearly matched the needs in
the past five years. Staff’s analysis suggests that concession revenues, combined with
concessional borrowing, and topped up by public-private partnerships could bridge much of
the presently large infrastructure financing gap over the next ten years. This would require
improved implementation capacity from the authorities, enhanced donor coordination, and
continued involvement of the private sector. Infrastructure scaling up could in turn stimulate
production along growth corridors if other impediments are reduced.
58.
Financial sector development continues. The ongoing work on strengthening the
legal and regulatory framework needs to be completed, with the focus of attention shifting
from banks to the nonbank sector. Renewed impetus for developing the payment system is
urgently needed as little concrete progress has been made in the past two years. Creative
solutions are required to improve access to the financial sector. Cross-country experience
suggests that mobile banking shows a lot of promise for rural areas, as do some interventions
in microfinance and structured small and medium enterprise finance.
59.
Program performance continues to be generally good. All performance criteria
through end-June 2010 were observed. Delays in the completion of structural benchmarks
were relatively minor. While the preparation of the FY2011 budget was exemplary, the four
month delay in legislative approval and executive finalization of the estimates undermined
the effectiveness of the extensive investment in budget preparation. All sovereign arrears to
private creditors have been cleared; the financing assurances review is no longer applicable.
60.
The authorities have developed a good track record at coping with unforeseen
developments, most notably the adverse income and investment effects of the global
financial crisis. The principal risks, aside from adverse external developments, are loss of
reform momentum, leading to unbalanced growth and unmet development objectives.
However, staff are confident that these risks could be mitigated in the context of Liberia’s

26
vision for its future by maintaining a strict focus on removing the multiform barriers to
growth outside the enclave sectors.
61.
Staff recommend completion of the fifth review under the ECF arrangement,
and support the sixth disbursement under the arrangement on the basis of the continued
progress achieved to date and the authorities’ demonstrated commitment to achieving key
program objectives. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Liberia take
place in accordance with the 2010 Decision on consultation cycles.

27
Figure 1. Liberia: Recent Economic Developments, 2006–10

Contributions to growth
(Percent of GDP)
15

15

12

12

8

8

9

9

4

4

6

6

3

3

0

0

(Percent)

12

Real GDP growth rate
SSA real GDP growth rate

12

0

2006

2007

2007

2008

2009

60

Secondary sector

20

20

0

0

50

Food

40

Expenditures and net lending
Overall balance

30

30

20

20

10

10

0
-60

75

Revenues and grants

40

-40

Imported f uel

Dec-07

50

(Percent of GDP)

-20

Overall

-60
Dec-06

-8

Agriculture and mining

Fiscal Policy (cash basis)

40

-40

0

Tertiary sector

60

40

-20

2010

-4

2010

Components of Inf lation
(12 month percent change)

2009

-4

-8
2006

2008

Dec-08

Dec-09

FY2006

FY2007

FY2009

FY2010

-10

0

-10

75

Balance of Payments

FY2008

Exchange Rates
130

50

50

130

25

25

120

120

110

110

100

100

0

0

-25

-25

-50

-50

-75

-75
2006

2007

2008

2009

(January 2005 = 100)

90

90

2010

FDI (percent of GDP)
Annual change of terms of trade (%, deterioration -)
Current account (percent of GDP)

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

80
70
Jan-06

REER (+: appreciation)
US$/LB$ (average)

80
70

Jan-07

Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

28
Figure 2. Liberia: Medium-term Fiscal and Balance of Payments Outlook, FY2009–13
(Percent of GDP)
Composition of Revenues
Fiscal Position

6

6

Overall balance including grants
Overall balance excluding grants

4
2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

-8

-8

-10

-10
FY2009

FY2010

FY2011

FY2012

50

50

4

Non-tax
Taxes on international trade
Taxes on goods and services and other
Taxes on income, prof its, and capital gains

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
FY2009

FY2013

Composition of Expenditures

FY2010

FY2011

FY2012

FY2013

Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

Capital expenditure
Current expenditures

50

50

40

200

Income and current transf ers
Services
Goods
Current account

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

0

0
FY2010

FY2011

FY2012

FY2013

200

100

100

FY2009

40

-100

-100

-200

-200
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Gross International Reserves
Level in US dollar millions (LHS)

400

Months of imports (RHS) 1/

300
250

300

3

200

2

100

1

0

0

300

Public Debt Outstanding

4

Central government domestic debt
Public external debt

200

200

150

150

100

100

50
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

250

50

0

0
FY2009

Note: 1. Excluding UNMIL imports

1/ Fiscal year ends in June.
Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

FY2010

FY2011

FY2012

FY2013

29
Figure 3a. Liberia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
under Alternatives Scenarios, 2010/11-2030/31 1/
8

a. Debt Accumulation

7
6

52

90

52

80

52

70

5

Rate of Debt Accumulation

52

60

4

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

52

50

3

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

51

40

51

30

51

1

20

51

10

0
2010/11

51

2

2015/16

2020/21

2025/26

0
2010/11

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

400

160

350

140

300

120

250

100

200

80

2015/16

2020/21

2025/26

b. PV of debt-to-GDP ra tio

a. Debt Accumulation
180

b. PV of debt-to-GDP ratio

52 100

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

150

60

100

40

50

20
0
2010/11

2015/16

2020/21

2025/26

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

16

0
2010/11

30

14

2015/16

2020/21

2025/26

f .Debt service-to-revenue ratio

25

12
20
10
8

15

6

10

4

5

2
0
2010/11

2015/16
Baseline

2020/21

2025/26

0
2010/11

Historical scenario 2/

2015/16
Threshold

2020/21

2025/26

Most extreme shock _

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2019/20. In figures b, d, e, and f it corresponds to
loans on less favorable terms; in c. to export values growing at historical average minus one standard deviation.
2/ Given the lack of reliability of historical data, the DSA uses only FY 2004/05 to FY2007/08 data while excluding FY2008/09
to minimize the impact of the global crisis on the limited sample. The historical scenario breaches the PV debt to GDP
threshold, but staff does not consider this a reliable indicator of potential debt distress, as it results mainly from the high
current account deficits in the period following the return of political stability.

30
Figure 3b. Liberia: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2010/11-2030/31 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Growth

Historical scenario 3/

70

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
2010/11

2012/13

200

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

2026/27

2028/29

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

2026/27

2028/29

2022/23

2024/25

2026/27

2028/29

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

150

100

50

0

-50

-100
2010/11

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

12

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
2010/11

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2020/21.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.
3/ Given the lack of reliability of historical data, the DSA uses only FY 2004/05 to FY2007/08 data while excluding FY2008/09
to minimize the impact of the global crisis on the limited sample. The historical scenario breaches the PV debt to GDP
threshold, but staff does not consider this a reliable indicator of potential debt distress, as it results mainly from the high
current account deficits in the period following the return of political stability.

31
Table 1. Liberia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2008–12
2008

2009
Prel.

2010
4th Review1/

2010
Proj.

2011
4th Review1/

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National account and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator (US dollars)
Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)
Nominal GDP per capita (US dollars)
Consumer prices (average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
Consumer prices (US dollar denominated, year-on-year)

7.1
7.3
850.7
243.2
17.5
9.4
5.1

4.6
-1.2
879.0
239.6
7.4
9.7
2.4

6.3
2.6
952.9
249.1
7.6
4.8
0.3

6.3
4.5
976.6
255.3
7.4
4.7
0.7

8.5
-0.2
1,032.2
260.3
3.9
4.7
2.0

8.8
-0.8
1,054.1
265.8
4.2
4.6
0.8

11.7
4.6
1,231.2
300.8
4.8
5.0
1.1

External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b
Terms of trade (deterioration -) 2/
Average exchange rate (local currency per U.S. dollar)
Nominal effective exchange rate change (depreciation -)
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -)
Import coverage of reserves (months)
Import coverage of reserves without UNMIL imports (months)
Gross official reserves (millions of US dollars)

22.2
42.2
-8.1
63.2
-7.7
3.4
0.6
0.8
107.8

-39.7
-20.6
-9.4
68.3
-2.9
3.4
2.3
3.2
312.2

62.3
22.6
41.6
…
…
…
2.0
2.6
334.2

34.8
16.8
66.1
…
…
…
1.9
2.6
317.1

25.5
39.5
-22.2
…
…
…
1.8
2.3
351.5

52.5
60.9
-20.6
…
…
…
1.6
2.0
329.8

30.9
11.2
-18.2
…
…
…
1.7
2.0
339.9

39.5
36.7
60.2
62.9
43.4

13.5
5.2
26.3
24.2
41.5

23.8
31.5
15.6
10.4
48.8

22.6
30.2
13.4
16.4
-6.2

17.7
2.0
17.6
10.0
53.6

24.5
8.5
28.9
11.4
167.4

5.6
12.5
14.9
9.1
33.8

Central government budget 3/
Total revenue and grants
Of which: total revenue 5/
Total expenditure and net lending
Of which: current expenditure
capital expenditure

(Annual percentage change; beginning period stock of broad money,
unless otherwise indicated)
Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net claims on central government
Claims on nongovernment
Other items (net)
Broad money (M2) 4/
Reserve money (annual percentage change)
Velocity (GDP-to-M2)
Money multiplier (M2/M0)

2.7
38.8
10.3
16.5
12.0
45.7
13.1
3.0
4.4

-20.9
55.5
38.8
24.0
-7.4
37.7
12.4
2.5
5.2

253.9
-228.4
-251.7
1.2
9.6
12.6
24.3
2.5
4.6

247.0
-232.4
-251.2
2.3
10.7
1.9
-3.2
2.8
5.4

5.9
-2.5
-0.4
4.5
4.5
10.2
16.1
2.5
4.4

5.5
3.4
-0.5
5.4
4.1
9.6
15.0
2.9
5.2

7.9
10.5
-0.9
9.7
1.8
17.6
19.0
3.0
5.1

(Percent of GDP)
External sector
Current account balance
(including official grants)
(excluding official grants)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b
Central government budget 3/
Total revenue and grants
Of which: total revenue 5/
Total expenditure and net lending
Of which: current expenditure
capital expenditure
Overall fiscal balance (including grants)
Overall fiscal balance (excluding grants)
Public external debt
Central government domestic debt

-57.3
-185.3
-53.4
29.9
-83.3

-36.8
-148.2
-46.6
17.4
-64.0

-39.9
-152.0
-46.3
26.1
-72.4

-40.4
-152.0
-46.1
21.2
-67.3

-55.8
-149.3
-63.0
30.3
-93.3

-59.2
-149.3
-70.4
29.9
-100.3

-64.9
-131.5
-62.0
33.5
-95.5

26.0
25.2
24.8
21.8
3.0
1.2
0.5
376.6
39.4

27.2
24.4
28.8
24.9
3.9
-1.6
-4.4
190.9
34.3

31.8
30.4
31.5
26.0
5.5
0.4
-1.1
15.6
32.2

31.1
29.7
30.4
27.0
3.4
0.6
-0.8
8.9
31.5

34.5
28.5
34.1
26.3
7.8
0.4
-5.5
15.6
28.9

35.3
29.4
35.8
27.5
8.4
-0.5
-6.4
9.6
29.7

33.1
29.4
36.6
26.6
9.9
-3.4
-7.2
11.2
27.4

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/

IMF Country Report No. 10/193.
The base year is updated from 1997 to 2005 (2005 = 100).
Fiscal year ending in June on a cash basis (debt service payments shown after all debt relief).
Defined as Liberian currency outside banks plus demand, time, and savings deposits in Liberian and US dollars.
Excluding additional tax revenue measures to close fiscal gaps for FY2011.

32
Table 2. Liberia: Balance of Payments, 2008–12
(Millions of US dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2012

-455
254
225
-709

-409
153
93
-563

-450
207
136
-657

-742
315
138
-1,057

-764
413
120
-1,176

-1,007
-488

-740
-455

-847
-455

-817
-418

-849
-342

-160
-90
-1

-145
-111
1

-179
-108
0

-117
-1
0

-152
-1
0

1,134
1,087
646
47

970
920
600
50

1,082
1,019
600
63

1,052
967
550
85

966
878
450
88

Current account balance
Current account balance, excluding grants

-488
-1,575

-324
-1,244

-395
-1,414

-624
-1,592

-799
-1,677

Capital and financial account (net)
Capital account (HIPC debt relief) 3/
Financial account
Foreign direct investment (net)
Portfolio investment (net)
Other investment (net)
Official financing: Medium and long-term (net)
SDR allocation
Disbursements
Amortization 3/
Private financing (net) 4/

370
1,197
-827
272
0
-1,099
-1,210
0
0
-1,210
111

371
1,526
-1,156
153
0
-1,309
-1,373
163
0
-1,536
64

1,136
1,439
-303
340
0
-644
-670
0
3
-673
26

635
0
635
602
0
33
23
0
27
-4
10

819
0
819
738
0
81
37
0
43
-6
44

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: rubber
Imports, f.o.b
Services (net)
Of which: UNMIL services

1/

Income (net)
Of which: public interest payments due 2/
Of which: IMF
Current transfers
Donor transfers (net)
Of which: UNMIL transfers
Private transfers (net)

Errors and omissions

43

20

0

0

0

-75

67

741

11

20

Financing
Change in net foreign assets (increase -) 5/
Of which: Net use of Fund credit and loans 3/
Disbursements
Repayments
Exceptional financing
Debt forgiveness
Change in arrears 6/
Debt rescheduling plus HIPC interim debt relief 7/
Financing gap

75
-15
22
882
-860
90
1,197
-1,197
90
0

-67
-178
18
18
0
111
1,526
-1,526
111
0

-741
-849
-850
13
-863
108
1,439
-1,439
108
0

-11
-11
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0

-20
-20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Memorandum items:
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Including grants
Excluding grants
Trade Balance (percent of GDP)
Donor transfers (net, percent of GDP)

-57.3
-185.1
-53.4
127.8

-36.8
-147.4
-46.6
104.7

-40.4
-148.1
-46.1
104.4

-59.2
-146.2
-70.4
91.8

-64.9
-121.7
-62.0
71.3

3,203
376.6
13.6
1.6

1,678
190.9
0.0
0.0

87
8.9
2.1
0.2

101
9.6
5.7
0.5

138
11.2
7.2
0.6

Overall balance

Public sector external debt (medium and long-term)
Debt outstanding, including arrears
(percent of GDP)
Debt service charges (after relief)
(percent of GDP)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

133.5

121.0

200.9

159.4

130.4

Gross official reserves
Gross official reserves (months of imports) 8/
Gross official reserves (months of imports) 9/

107.8
0.8
0.9

312.2
3.2
3.4

317.1
2.6
3.1

329.8
2.0
2.6

339.9
2.0
2.6

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Net of estimated value of goods and services purchased by UNMIL (and its staff) in Liberia.
2/ From 2007, interest charged on debt stock after application of traditional debt relief mechanisms.
3/ Assumes debt relief at the HIPC completion point in 2010.
4/ Includes short-term trade credits and private sector operating balances abroad.
5/ Includes SDR assets and excludes SDR liabilities for US$ 163.2 million.
6/ Includes debt forgiveness from multilateral creditors and Paris Club creditors .
7/ Includes deferred debt service payments in the interim period.
8/ Excludes UNMIL service imports
9/ Excludes UNMIL services and FDI-related imports

33
Table3a. Liberia: Monetary Survey, 2008–12
(Millions of US dollar; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2012

( Central Bank Survey )
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net claims on government
Claims on other public sector 1/
Claims on private sector
Claims on commercial banks
Other items (net) 2/

-764.2

-749.1

100.0

111.0

131.3

836.7
1,068.3
0.0
1.8
0.0
-233.4

823.0
1,067.4
0.0
1.8
0.0
-246.1

-30.9
191.7
0.0
1.9
0.0
-224.5

-34.5
182.8
0.0
2.1
0.0
-219.3

-43.6
172.9
0.0
2.5
0.0
-218.9

72.4

73.9

69.1

76.5

87.7

Base money

( Monetary Survey )
Net foreign assets
Of which: Fund credit and overdue charges
CBL's gross foreign reserves 3/
government US$-denominated deposits at CBL
commercial banks' US$-denominated deposits at CBL
CBL's net foreign exchange position 3/

-674.0
-858.0
139.0
36.8
52.8
49.5

-664.3
-891.2
372.5
45.5
60.2
266.7

183.9
-53.1
379.1
47.1
61.9
270.1

194.8
-59.9
394.2
45.3
64.3
284.6

215.2
-59.9
412.3
43.6
72.4
296.3

935.2
1,193.4
1,076.0
836.4
117.4
103.8
1.0
0.0
-258.1

988.5
1,241.3
1,074.3
851.3
167.0
136.5
17.9
0.0
-252.9

178.2
386.7
198.5
0.0
169.0
151.7
17.3
0.0
-208.5

182.5
369.7
189.3
0.0
180.4
163.7
16.7
0.0
-187.2

212.3
386.4
179.1
0.0
207.3
191.3
16.1
0.0
-174.2

63.3
56.8
6.5

67.1
59.0
8.1

62.7
54.9
7.8

69.4
61.1
8.4

79.6
69.8
9.8

Commercial bank deposits
Total demand deposits
L$-denominated deposits
US$-denominated deposits
Time, savings and other deposits
L$-denominated deposits
US$-denominated deposits

207.7
142.4
12.1
130.2
65.4
15.5
49.9

284.7
201.3
12.3
188.9
83.5
19.4
64.0

285.9
193.6
13.7
180.0
92.2
21.6
70.6

298.3
201.7
14.8
174.9
96.7
23.3
66.9

337.3
109.7
27.2
82.5
227.5
17.3
210.3

Broad money (M2)
L$ component
US$ component

276.9
84.5
192.4

346.0
90.8
255.2

340.8
90.2
250.6

359.4
99.1
260.2

407.1
114.3
292.8

42.3
5.9
36.4
10.5
8.8
-0.5
44.1

25.0
2.3
22.7
2.1
6.0
-0.2
31.5

-1.5
-0.2
-1.3
-6.4
-6.6
-81.5
11.1

5.4
2.6
2.8
10.7
10.7
-4.6
7.9

13.3
4.2
9.1
14.6
14.7
-5.4
16.8

3.1
4.4

2.5
5.2

2.9
5.4

2.9
5.2

3.0
5.1

107.8

312.2

317.1

329.8

339.9

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net claims on government
Of which: IMF credit and overdue charges
Claims on nongovernment
Claims on private sector
Claims on public enterprises
Claims on nonbank financial institutions
Other Items (Net)
Monetary aggregates
Monetary Base (M0)
Currency in circulation
Required reserves

Memorandum items:
Broad money (annual change)
L$ component as percent of beginning period broad money
US$ component as percent of beginning period broad money
Reserve money (annual change)
Base money (annual change)
Credit to government (annual change)
Credit to private sector (annual change)
Velocity (GDP-to-M2)
Money multiplier (M2/M0)
CBL's gross official foreign reserves

3/

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Include public enterprises and the local government.
2/ Including valuation.
3/ SDR holdings are included from December 2009.

34
Table 3b. Liberia: Monetary Survey, 2008–12
(Millions of Liberian dollar; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2012

( Central Bank Survey )
Net foreign assets

-48,911

-52,811

7,298

8,416

10,338

Net domestic assets
Net claims on government
Claims on other public sector 1/
Claims on private sector
Claims on commercial banks
Other items (net) 2/

53,546
68,370
0
2
0
-14,937

58,022
75,249
0
2
0
-17,350

-2,253
13,988
0
142
0
-16,383

-2,613
13,860
0
159
0
-16,632

-3,433
13,610
0
193
0
-17,236

4,635

5,211

5,045

5,803

6,905

Base money

( Monetary Survey )
Net foreign assets
Of which: Fund credit and overdue charges
CBL's gross foreign reserves 3/
government US$-denominated deposits at CBL
commercial banks' US$-denominated deposits at CBL
CBL's net foreign exchange position 3/

-43,137
-54,910
8,897
2,353
3,378
3,166

-46,832
-62,828
12,057
3,207
4,247
4,603

13,415
-3,874
27,658
3,434
4,519
19,705

14,774
-4,543
29,891
3,434
4,878
21,579

16,939
-4,719
32,459
3,434
5,698
23,327

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net claims on government
Of which: IMF credit and overdue charges
Claims on nongovernment
Claims on private sector
Claims on public enterprises
Claims on nonbank financial institutions
Other Items (Net)

59,855
76,376
68,862
53,530
7,514
104
64
0
-16,521

69,687
87,513
75,740
60,017
11,774
137
1,264
0
-17,826

13,000
28,215
14,479
0
12,332
11,068
1,264
0
-15,215

13,837
28,033
14,351
0
13,681
12,417
1,264
0
-14,196

16,710
30,422
14,101
0
16,321
15,057
1,264
0
-13,712

4,051
3,637
414

4,732
4,162
570

4,575
4,009
566

5,265
4,630
635

6,267
5,497
770

Commercial bank deposits
Total demand deposits
L$-denominated deposits
US$-denominated deposits
Time, savings and other deposits
L$-denominated deposits
US$-denominated deposits

13,294
9,111
776
8,335
4,183
992
3,191

20,073
14,189
868
13,321
5,884
1,370
4,514

20,857
14,129
998
13,130
6,728
1,575
5,153

22,622
15,293
1,120
13,382
7,329
1,768
5,122

26,551
8,639
2,143
6,496
17,912
1,358
16,554

Broad money (M2)
L$ component
US$ component

17,719
5,405
12,314

24,391
6,400
17,990

24,866
6,583
18,283

27,252
7,517
19,735

32,048
8,999
23,050

45.7
6.9
38.8
13.1
11.5
1.9
47.6

37.7
5.6
32.0
12.4
16.8
10.0
44.8

1.9
0.7
1.2
-3.2
-3.3
-80.9
15.0

9.6
3.8
5.8
15.0
15.1
-0.9
12.2

17.6
5.4
12.2
19.0
19.0
-1.7
21.3

3.0
4.4
205.7

2.5
5.2
185.9

2.8
5.4
155.7

2.9
5.2
160.3

3.0
5.1
157.0

6,917

22,011

23,139

25,013

26,761

Monetary aggregates
Monetary Base (M0)
Currency in circulation
Required reserves

Memorandum items:
Broad money (annual change)
L$ component as percent of beginning period broad money
US$ component as percent of beginning period broad money
Reserve money (annual change)
Base money (annual change)
Credit to government (annual change)
Credit to private sector (annual change)
Velocity (GDP-to-M2)
Money multiplier (M2/M0)
Currency/deposits (percent; L$ only)
CBL's gross official foreign reserves

3/

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Include public enterprises and the local government.
2/ Including valuation.

35
Table 4a. Liberia: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, FY2009–13
(Millions of US dollars)
FY2009

FY2010
4th Review

Proj

FY2011
4th Review

1/

Proj.

FY2012
Proj.

FY2013

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax Revenue
Taxes on income, profits, and capital gains
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade
Other taxes
Non-tax
Grants

234.9
211.3
190.0
65.8
33.7
87.9
2.6
21.3
23.6

290.9
277.9
204.3
68.1
42.4
87.5
6.3
73.5
13.0

288.0
275.0
207.8
70.2
39.2
91.7
6.7
67.3
13.0

342.4
283.3
203.6
57.6
48.3
94.3
3.4
79.8
59.1

358.6
298.5
205.1
60.6
48.5
92.7
3.4
93.3
60.2

378.8
335.9
242.7
76.5
50.9
111.8
3.5
93.2
42.9

439.5
384.5
284.5
106.2
53.2
121.4
3.7
100.0
55.0

Expenditures and net lending
Current expenditures
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Subsides and transfers
Interest 1/
Capital expenditure
Foreign loan financed 2/
Domestic and grant financed

248.9
215.1
91.4
75.3
40.9
7.5
33.8
0.0
33.8

287.6
237.4
114.0
74.5
48.1
0.8
50.2
0.0
50.2

282.2
250.5
113.9
76.7
55.7
4.2
31.7
0.0
31.7

338.4
261.2
134.6
77.8
44.5
4.3
77.2
0.0
77.2

363.7
278.9
140.3
82.2
51.9
4.5
84.8
0.0
84.8

417.8
304.3
152.0
89.0
56.2
7.1
113.4
34.3
79.1

497.5
331.0
162.8
95.4
63.1
9.8
166.5
51.7
114.8

Overall balance 3/
Including grants
Excluding grants

-14.0
-37.6

3.2
-9.8

5.9
-7.1

4.0
-55.1

-5.0
-65.2

-39.0
-81.9

-58.0
-113.0

14.0
-3.7
0.0
-3.7
17.7
0.0

-3.2
-3.5
0.0
-3.5
0.3
0.0

-5.9
-3.3
0.0
-3.3
-2.6
0.0

-4.0
-2.7
0.0
-2.7
-1.3
0.0

5.0
-3.0
0.0
-3.0
8.1
0.0

39.0
28.4
34.3
-5.9
10.6
0.0

58.0
45.8
51.7
-5.9
12.2
0.0

1,677.6
296.4
282.7
19.8
-3.9
-6.5
864.8

149.0
293.7
280.4
53.5
40.5
4.0
913.5

87.1
292.0
280.4
37.6
24.6
10.1
927.8

161.5
287.3
274.5
81.1
22.1
8.3
992.6

101.3
302.0
278.9
79.7
19.5
-0.5
1,015.4

138.4
313.1
278.3
74.4
31.5
-31.9
1,142.7

193.7
325.2
277.6
108.5
53.5
-48.2
1,293.0

Identified financing
External financing (net)
Loans
Amortization (-)
Domestic Borrowing
Unidentified financing
Memorandum items:
Total public external debt
Central government domestic debt
o/w Foreign currency denominated
Basic balance 4/
Current balance 5/
Primary balance, including grants
Fiscal year nominal GDP

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Budget is shown on a cash basis (i.e. debt service payments are shown after all debt relief).
2/ Approximately 50 percent of on-budget loan-financed capital expenditure substitutes for hitherto off-budget grant-financed expenditure.
3/ Through fiscal year 2009/10, budgets are assumed to be balanced on a cash basis. Non-zero fiscal balances reported up to 2009/10 are
due to some budget expenditures (e.g., payments of arrears, amortization) being reported as financing items; and to the drawdown of
government deposits accumulated in prior years.
4/ Basic balance is defined as (total revenue and grants minus project grants) minus (total expenditure minus foreign and domestically
financed investment spending).
5/ Current revenue less current expenditure.

36
Table 4b. Liberia: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, FY2009–13
(Percent of GDP)
FY2009

FY2010
4th Review

Proj.

FY2011
4th Review

1/

Proj.

FY2012
Proj.

FY2013

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax Revenue
Taxes on income, profits, and capital gains
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade
Other taxes
Non-tax
Grants

27.2
24.4
22.0
7.6
3.9
10.2
0.3
2.5
2.7

31.8
30.4
22.4
7.5
4.6
9.6
0.7
8.0
1.4

31.0
29.6
22.4
7.6
4.2
9.9
0.7
7.3
1.4

34.5
28.5
20.5
5.8
4.9
9.5
0.3
8.0
5.9

35.3
29.4
20.2
6.0
4.8
9.1
0.3
9.2
5.9

33.1
29.4
21.2
6.7
4.5
9.8
0.3
8.2
3.8

34.0
29.7
22.0
8.2
4.1
9.4
0.3
7.7
4.3

Expenditures and net lending
Current expenditures
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Subsides and transfers
Interest 1/
Capital expenditure
Foreign loan financed 2/
Domestic and grant financed

28.8
24.9
10.6
8.7
4.7
0.9
3.9
0.0
3.9

31.5
26.0
12.5
8.2
5.3
0.1
5.5
0.0
5.5

30.4
27.0
12.3
8.3
6.0
0.5
3.4
0.0
3.4

34.1
26.3
13.6
7.8
4.5
0.4
7.8
0.0
7.8

35.8
27.5
13.8
8.1
5.1
0.4
8.3
0.0
8.3

36.6
26.6
13.3
7.8
4.9
0.6
9.9
3.0
6.9

38.5
25.6
12.6
7.4
4.9
0.8
12.9
4.0
8.9

Overall balance 3/
Including grants
Excluding grants

-1.6
-4.4

0.4
-1.1

0.6
-0.8

0.4
-5.5

-0.5
-6.4

-3.4
-7.2

-4.5
-8.7

Identified financing
External financing (net)
Loans
Amortization (-)
Domestic Borrowing
Unidentified financing

1.6
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
2.0
0.0

-0.4
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
0.0
0.0

-0.6
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
-0.3
0.0

-0.4
-0.3
0.0
-0.3
-0.1
0.0

0.5
-0.3
0.0
-0.3
0.8
0.0

3.4
2.5
3.0
-0.5
0.9
0.0

4.5
3.5
4.0
-0.5
0.9
0.0

194.0
34.3
32.7
2.3
-0.4
-0.7
864.8

16.3
32.2
30.7
5.9
4.4
0.4
913.5

9.4
31.5
30.2
4.0
2.6
1.1
927.8

16.3
28.9
27.7
8.2
2.2
0.8
992.6

10.0
29.7
27.5
7.9
1.9
0.0
1,015.4

12.1
27.4
24.4
6.5
2.8
-2.8
1,142.7

15.0
25.1
21.5
8.4
4.1
-3.7
1,293.0

Memorandum items:
Total public external debt
Central government domestic debt
o/w Foreign currency denominated
Basic balance 4/
Current balance 5/
Primary balance, including grants
Fiscal year nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Budget is shown on a cash basis (i.e. debt service payments are shown after all debt relief).
2/ Approximately 50 percent of on-budget loan-financed capital expenditure substitutes for hitherto off-budget grant-financed expenditure.
3/ Through fiscal year 2009/10, budgets are assumed to be balanced on a cash basis. Non-zero fiscal balances reported up to 2009/10 are due
to some budget expenditures (e.g., payments of arrears, amortization) being reported as financing items; and to the drawdown of government
deposits accumulated in prior years.
4/ Basic balance is defined as (total revenue and grants minus project grants) minus (total expenditure minus foreign and domestically financed
investment spending).
5/ Current revenue less current expenditure.

37
Table 5. Liberia: Medium-Term Outlook, 2009–15
2009

2010
4th Rev

2010
Proj.

2011
4th Rev

2011
Proj.

2012

2013
Proj.

2014

2015

(Annual percentage change)
National income prices
Real GDP
Agriculture & fisheries
Forestry
Mining & panning
Manufacturing
Services
Real GDP excl. mining
Prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (annual average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
Real GDP per capita (US dollar)
Population (millions)

4.6
6.4
1.4
6.8
-3.8
6.9
4.6

6.3
3.9
13.7
14.7
2.9
6.7
6.1

6.3
3.5
13.3
16.1
2.9
7.3
6.3

8.5
3.9
13.7
112.9
4.5
7.3
6.5

8.8
4.3
13.7
163.0
4.5
4.6
6.6

11.7
4.1
4.4
156.1
4.2
7.0
6.5

8.4
4.3
4.4
41.6
3.9
5.7
6.0

7.1
4.5
7.0
19.1
4.0
5.6
5.8

7.0
4.6
0.7
23.5
4.0
5.5
4.3

-1.2
7.4
9.7
144.9
3.7

2.6
7.6
4.8
147.7
3.8

4.5
7.4
4.7
147.7
3.8

-0.2
3.9
4.7
154.7
4.0

-0.8
4.2
4.6
155.0
4.0

4.6
4.8
5.0
167.7
4.1

1.5
5.0
5.0
176.6
4.2

1.7
5.0
5.0
183.8
4.3

1.9
5.0
5.0
191.0
4.5

100.0
37.9
12.0
20.2
4.5
25.5

100.0
36.7
12.3
21.6
4.3
25.1

100.0
35.7
11.5
23.9
4.2
24.7

34.0
29.7
4.3
38.5
25.6
12.9
-4.5
-8.7
14.3
25.1

35.7
30.9
4.8
41.2
25.5
15.8
-5.5
-10.3
17.6
23.7

35.4
30.4
5.0
40.7
25.5
15.2
-5.3
-10.3
20.4
22.7

32.4
17.2
3.1
4.9

31.8
17.5
3.1
4.7

31.2
18.0
3.2
4.6

-20.9
-68.0
-9.3
54.6
-64.0
47.5
359.7
2.6
2.9

-13.8
-62.6
-2.0
59.6
-61.6
35.0
369.4
2.6
2.9

(Percent share)
Nominal GDP
Agriculture & fisheries
Forestry
Mining & panning
Manufacturing
Services

100.0
52.5
10.7
0.9
5.6
30.3

100.0
51.0
12.3
1.5
5.5
29.7

100.0
50.8
11.9
1.1
5.3
30.9

100.0
46.2
13.8
4.9
5.3
29.8

100.0
46.5
13.5
6.6
5.2
28.3

100.0
40.4
12.3
16.5
4.7
26.2

(Percent of GDP, fiscal year)
Central government operations
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall fiscal balance, including grants
Overall fiscal balance, excluding grants
Public external debt
Central government domestic debt

27.2
24.4
2.7
28.8
24.9
3.9
-1.6
-4.4
190.9
34.3

31.8
30.4
1.4
31.5
26.0
5.5
0.4
-1.1
15.6
32.2

31.0
29.6
1.4
30.4
27.0
3.4
0.6
-0.8
8.9
31.5

34.5
28.5
5.9
34.1
26.3
7.8
0.4
-5.5
15.6
28.9

35.3
29.4
5.9
35.8
27.5
8.3
-0.5
-6.4
9.6
29.7

33.1
29.4
3.8
36.6
26.6
9.9
-3.4
-7.2
11.2
27.4

(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
M2 / GDP
Private sector credit / GDP
Velocity (GDP-to-M2)
Money multiplier (M2/M0)

39.4
15.5
2.5
5.2

39.4
15.8
2.5
4.6

34.9
15.7
2.9
5.4

39.0
15.8
2.6
4.4

34.1
16.1
2.9
5.2

33.1
16.7
3.0
5.1

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Current account balance, including grants
Current account balance, excluding grants
Trade balance
Exports
Imports
Grants (donor transfers, net)
Gross official reserves (millions of US dollars)
Months of imports of goods and services 1
Months of imports of goods and services 2

-36.8
-148.2
-46.6
17.4
-64.0
104.7
312.2
3.2
3.4

-39.9
-152.0
-46.3
26.1
-72.4
111.9
334.2
2.6
3.1

-40.4
-152.0
-46.1
21.2
-67.3
104.4
317.1
2.6
3.1

Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes UNMIL service imports
2/ Excludes UNMIL service and FDI-related imports

-55.8
-149.3
-63.0
30.3
-93.3
93.4
351.5
2.3
2.9

-59.2
-149.3
-70.4
29.9
-100.3
91.8
329.8
2.0
2.6

-64.9
-131.5
-62.0
33.5
-95.5
71.3
339.9
2.0
2.6

-74.9
-97.4
-53.3
45.4
-98.8
58.3
349.9
1.9
2.5

38
Table 6. Liberia: Millennium Development Goals

General Indicators
Population (millions)
Gross national income ($ billions)
GNI per capita ($)
Adult literacy rate (percent of people of ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births for women)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Merchandise Trade (% of GDP)

1995

2000

2009

2.1
0.6
280.0
6.9
41.0
...

2.1
0.3
110.0
41.0
6.8
42.0
80.8

3.1
0.4
130.0
...
6.8
43.0
47.5

4.0
0.9
160.0
...
6.0
58.0
91.9

...
34.0

...
42.0

22.8
...

...
...

...
...

43
...

...
12,996

58
22,610

72.3
11.4
8.0

89.5
114
...
12.5

...

Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates:
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)
Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education
2015 target: = net enrollment to 100
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Primary education, teachers
Goal 3. Promote gender equality
2005 targets = education ratio to 100
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (percent of ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)

1990

...
...
...
...

...
84 ...
...
6.0

Goal 4. Reduce child mortality
2015 target = Reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
Under five mortality rate (per 1000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)

246.9
165.0
...

253.3
169.3
...

198.2
133.5
63.0

112.0
79.9
64.0

Goal 5. Improve maternal health
2015 target: Reduce 1990 maternal mortality by two-thirds
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)

1,100
...

1,400
...

1,100
50.9

990
...

0.4
...
200
...

1.2
...
220
32.7

1.4
10
240
22.0

...
...
280
46.4

Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Targets: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of
environmental resources. Halve by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to
have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million dwellers.
39.0
35.9
Forest area (percent of total land area)
42.1
...
...
Terrestrial protected areas (% of total surface area)
...
0.2
0.2
0.2
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
58
61
65
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
11
13
14

...
15.0
...
68
17

Goal 8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Targets: Develop further an open rule-based, predictable, nondiscriminatory trading and financial system.
Address the special needs of the least developed countries and landlocked countries and small islands developing states.
Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and international measures in order to
make debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent
and productive work for youth. In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies,
specially information and communications.
Aid per capita (current US$)
75.0
57.0
23.8
45.3
50.0
54.3
Urban population (% of total)
Internet users (per 100 people)
...
0.0
0.0
Mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers (per 100 people)
0.4
0.2
0.3

101.2
60.8
0.5
19.3

Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
2015 target: = halted, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.
Prevalence of HIV, total (percent of ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women of ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detection rate (in percent)

Source: World Development Indicators database, September 2010.

Table 7. Liberia: Fund Credit Position and Projected Payments to the Fund, 2010-2021
(In millions of SDRs unless otherwise indicated)

Prospective drawings
ECF

2010
7/1-12/31

2011

8.88

4.44

-

Fund credit outstanding
In percent of
GDP
Gross Official Reserves
Exports of goods and services
Fiscal revenues (excluding grants)
Quota (under the 12th General Review)

-

2013

-

2014

-

2015

-

2016

-

2017

-

2018

2019

2020

2021

-

0.001

0.08
0.08
0.06
0.02
0.001

0.08
0.08
0.06
0.02
0.001

2.18
2.10
2.10
0.00
0.08
0.06
0.02
0.001

3.77
3.69
3.69
0.00
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.001

5.97
5.91
4.58
1.33
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.001

6.41
6.36
4.58
1.78
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.001

7.88
7.85
6.07
1.78
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.001

4.27
4.26
2.48
1.78
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.001

2.68
2.67
0.89
1.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.001

0.44
0.44
0.00
0.44
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.001

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2
0.9
0.3
0.6

0.4
1.6
0.5
1.0

0.5
2.4
0.7
1.5

0.5
2.5
0.7
1.5

0.6
3.0
0.8
1.7

0.3
1.6
0.4
0.9

0.2
1.0
0.3
0.5

0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1

28.8

33.3

33.3

33.3

31.2

27.5

21.6

15.2

7.3

3.1

0.4

0.0

4.5
13.8
7.9
13.1
22.3

4.8
15.3
7.1
13.7
25.7

4.1
14.9
6.7
12.4
25.7

3.7
14.5
5.4
10.8
25.7

3.2
13.2
4.3
9.0
24.1

2.6
11.3
3.4
7.4
21.3

1.9
8.6
2.4
5.3
16.7

1.2
5.9
1.7
3.5
11.8

0.6
2.8
0.8
1.6
5.7

0.2
1.1
0.3
0.6
2.4

0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Source: Finance Department and staff estimates.
1/ Data are actual through September 2010 and are projected after that. Effective on January 7, 2010 interest on ECF credit outstanding would be zero in 2010 and 2011. It is
assumed the ECF interest rate would be at 0.25% from 2012 and onward.

39

Projected debt service to the Fund 1/
Repayments and repurchases
ECF-current
ECF-projected
Interests
ECF-current
EFF
PRGF-projected
Charges
In percent of
GDP
Gross Official Reserves
Exports of goods and services
Fiscal revenues (excluding grants)

2012

40

Table 8. Liberia: Schedule of Disbursements Under the ECF/EFF Arrangements, 2008–11
Amount

Total : SDR 550.03 million

Actual Disbursement
Date/ Date of
Availability

Conditions for Disbursement1/

March 14, 2008

Executive Board approval of the three-year
ECF/EFF arrangements.

ECF: SDR 7.00 million

December 29, 2008

Executive Board approval of the first
review under the three-year ECF
arrangement.

ECF: SDR 7.00 million

May 14, 2009

Executive Board approval of the second
review under the three-year ECF
arrangement.

ECF: SDR 4.44 million

December 21, 2009

Executive Board approval of the third
review under the three-year ECF
arrangement.

ECF: SDR 4.44 million

July 2, 2010

Executive Board approval of the fourth
review under the three-year ECF
arrangement.

ECF: SDR 4.44 million

October 31, 2010

Observance of the performance criteria for
June 30, 2010, completion of the fifth
review of the arrangement.

ECF: SDR 4.44 million

February 15, 2011

Observance of the performance criteria for
December 31, 2010, completion of the
sixth review of the arrangement.

ECF: SDR 207.26 million
EFF: SDR 342.77 million

1/ In addition to the conditions that normally apply to an ECF arrangement.

41
APPENDIX I. LIBERIA: SUPPLEMENTARY LETTER OF INTENT

Monrovia, November 19, 2010
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
USA
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
The attached Supplementary Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP)
outlines the implementation of Liberia’s economic program supported by the Extended
Credit Facility (ECF) through September 2010, and recent economic policy actions and
commitments. It supplements the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies of
June 7, 2010. On the basis of our performance so far, and on the strength of the policies set
forth, we request that the fifth review under the ECF arrangement be completed and the sixth
disbursement in the amount of SDR 4.44 million be approved.
We believe that our policies are adequate to achieve the objectives of the program, but will
take any further measures that may become appropriate for this purpose. We will continue to
consult closely with Fund staff as detailed in our letter of December 3, 2008. Maintaining our
policy of openness and transparency, we consent to the publication on the IMF external
website of this letter, the accompanying Supplementary Memorandum of Economic and
Financial Policies, and the related Staff Report for the Article IV Consultation and Fifth
Review under the ECF.

Sincerely yours,

________/s/______
Augustine Ngafuan
Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance

Attachments

________/s/________
Joseph Mills Jones
Executive Governor
Central Bank of Liberia

42

ATTACHMENT I. LIBERIA: SUPPLEMENTARY MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND
FINANCIAL POLICIES, 2010
1.
Economic developments are encouraging and should support a continued
acceleration of growth over coming years, together with a pick-up in employment. After
a slowdown in 2009, economic activity is strengthening in 2010 with subdued price inflation.
Real GDP growth should rise above 6 percent from 4½ percent in 2009. Exports have
rebounded on account of rising rubber production and prices. Foreign direct investment
commitments are up sharply. So far this year we have ratified agreements for: two more iron
ore mines (bringing the number of ratified iron ore concessions to four); a second large-scale
palm oil plantation; and the rehabilitation of the Port of Monrovia. In addition, a major
multinational oil company is joining other companies in conducting offshore oil exploration.
2.
In September, the Legislature approved several Acts that will significantly
support private sector development and strengthen governance, including: the
Commercial Code; the Commercial Courts Act; and a revised Public Procurement and
Concessions Act.
3.
All quantitative performance criteria under the program through end-June 2010
were observed (Table 1a). We also met three out of four structural benchmarks set for
completion under the program for end-June 2010. Completion of the remaining benchmark,
computerized government asset registry, is expected to be completed by end-December 2010
(Table 2). However, there have been unforeseen difficulties in completing the compilation of
the national accounts data, and this will result in some delay in meeting the end-September
benchmark. Our intention is to finalize the publication of the national accounts at the
beginning of 2011.
4.
Liberia has finally returned to a sustainable level of public debt. The
announcement by Paris Club creditors of the cancellation of all remaining claims, and the
completion of the buyback of commercial debt with the last two remaining creditors were
welcome developments. We will aim to conclude remaining Paris Club bilateral agreements
by March 2011. Our efforts to reach agreement on HIPC terms with non-Paris Club creditors
are intensifying. While remaining committed to maintaining low debt vulnerability, we are
now seeking highly concessional financing to fund our pressing investment needs. In this
context, we will prepare procedures for submitting borrowing requests to the Debt
Management Committee by end-October.
5.
The 2010/11 Budget was approved by the Legislature in September. An
expansion of revenue is anticipated on account of one-off signature payments for concession
agreements, and increased sales taxes and excises on luxury goods and communications. As
announced in 2009, the top rates of corporate and personal income tax will be lowered from
35 to 25 percent on January 1, 2011, somewhat moderating the revenue increase. Significant
expenditure increases relate to the regularization of several thousand qualified volunteer
teachers and nurses onto the payroll, pay increases for police and armed services personnel,

43
election administration, and capital projects. Spending in support of PRS deliverables
accounts for 65 percent of total budgeted spending. Budget financing is presently limited to a
drawdown of uncommitted deposits in the amount of one percent of GDP and intra-year
treasury bill financing, which we expect to begin shortly. A supplementary budget will be
tabled should new financing sources become available.
6.
We have taken steps to promote full and orderly execution of the 2010/11
budget. Budget execution in 2009/10 was complicated by overly optimistic estimates of both
revenue and expenditure in the context of global recession. While arrears were avoided
through strict adherence to our risk-management plan, the deviation of planned from actual
expenditure created considerable dislocation and undermined spending efficiency. In 2010/11
we have balanced ambition and caution in estimating revenue and in given due recognition to
potential risks. On the expenditure side, we have carefully matched spending units’
twelve-month cash plans with the expected profile of revenue and intra-year domestic
financing. As a result, ministries and agencies will be in a better position to develop planning
expertise and to carry out their work programs more efficiently.
7.
Improvements continue in public financial management. The direct payment of
central government civil servant salaries has expanded greatly and now includes all of
Monrovia and some rural counties. We are making efforts to include the remaining
government agencies, and are investigating alternate arrangements for government workers
in the more remote areas. Further progress has been achieved in creating a computerized
asset registry with a few remaining ministries and agencies expected to be completed by
end-December 2010. Efforts to regularize payrolls have expanded to cover 15 ministries,
with considerable financial savings from eliminating fraudulent payments. An external audit
of pension payments is expected to be completed by end-2010; while a concerted effort is
being made to develop our internal audit capacity. We are building capacity in state-owned
enterprises to comply with public reporting requirements under the Public Financial
Management Act. We are confident that quarterly reporting to the Ministry of Finance will
begin in early 2011 (benchmark).
8.
The computerization of government treasury and revenue functions is now
proceeding. An integrated financial management information system will be the basis for
government accounting incorporating the new chart of accounts from July 1, 2011. We will
continue to roll out the ASYCUDA system in customs—expanding it to the Monrovia oil
terminal and international airport by end-December 2010 (benchmark)—and begin
implementing the IT system in the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
9.
Monetary and financial conditions are stable. Pressure for exchange rate
depreciation against the US dollar has lessened substantially since the beginning of the year
partly because of action taken by the CBL to smooth developments in the foreign exchange
market. Supported by a stable exchange rate and international oil price, inflation has
moderated since the second quarter of 2010. Assuming these conditions remain, inflation is
projected to be around 5 percent to end-2010. Net domestic assets of the CBL are slightly

44
below expectation at mid-year, reflecting higher-than-anticipated government and
commercial bank deposits at the CBL. Private sector credit growth has slowed since the onset
of the financial crisis but is now expected to stabilize at a reasonably buoyant pace of
expansion.
10.
Our efforts to transform the financial system to support inclusive, broad-based
growth are ongoing. We intend to consolidate our existing initiatives and to strengthen our
medium-term financial sector reform agenda as a center pillar of the overall growth strategy.
The Liberian public and other stakeholders will be informed of this enhanced framework. A
regulatory framework to establish a privately-managed credit reference bureau has been
formulated. The new Commercial Court Act will help strengthen creditors’ rights and
improve borrower’s access to bank credit. The new Commercial Code provides for lease and
mortgage financing. Following the issuance of regulations in June, a treasury bill program
will be launched later in 2010. The Central Bank of Liberia has revised the Anti-Money
Laundering Law of 2002 for submission to the Legislature following consultations with
stakeholders. The CBL has improved internal controls and established a satisfactory track
record in implementing the recommendations of the 2008 Safeguards Assessment. Against
this background, the next Monetary Data Reporting Package audit will be carried out by the
CBL internal audit department.
11.
Regional and multilateral trade agreement negotiations are advancing. We are
on track to begin migrating to the ECOWAS Common External Tariff by mid-2011. As
regards WTO accession, Liberia has been accorded observer status, and hopes to conclude
accession negotiations in 2012.
12.
We will persevere with our efforts to develop national accounts statistics.
Preliminary results of the labor force survey confirm high levels of vulnerable employment
status (self employment in the informal sector). The validation of national accounts data has
taken longer than expected to complete due to a poor rate of response from some large formal
sector enterprises, data issues, and difficulties in estimating the size of the informal sector.
Publication of new estimates is anticipated in February 2011 (delayed from September 2009).
We are preparing, with World Bank support, a household expenditure survey which will,
inter alia, support national accounts compilation going forward.
13.
Delivery of 2008–11 PRS objectives has improved, as indicated by the second year
implementation report. We have begun stakeholder consultations for a successor national
development strategy, “Liberia Rising 2030”, aimed at rapid, inclusive growth. To better
prioritize investment projects into a coherent program aligned to the national development
strategy, we will extend our project budget into a multi-year investment program. This will
cover selected spending ministries and link closely to the medium-term expenditure
framework being prepared for the FY2012 budget with support from the World Bank and
other donors.

Table 1a. Liberia: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, FY2010
(Millions of US dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Sep. 09
Program

Actual

Dec. 09

Mar. 10

Program Adjusted Actual
Target

Program Adjusted Actual
Target

Jun. 10
Program Adjusted
Target

Actual

Performance criteria and indicative targets 1/
Fiscal targets 2/
Floor on total revenue collection 3/

39.5

52.7

121.5

102.0

116.6

181.5

185.3

204.9

277.6

260.0

Floor on fiscal balance 4/

0.0

0.8

-4.1

-4.1

-0.9

-4.1

-4.1

19.6

-4.1

-4.1

-3.8

Floor on social and other priority spending (percent of total revenue and grants collected) 5/

…

…

60.0

60.0

63.8

60.0

60.0

60.1

60.0

60.0

70.7
0.0

275.0

Ceiling on new noncash tax/duty payment (continuous basis)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on new domestic borrowing (continuous basis)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

…

…

…

Ceiling on new domestic borrowing of the central government

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on new external borrowing (continuous basis)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on new domestic arrears/payables (continuous basis) 6/

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on new external arrears (continuous basis)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Central Bank of Liberia 7/
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Floor on CBL’s cash-based budget balance

-0.4

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

Floor on CBL’s net foreign exchange position 8/

57.1

60.3

248.4

248.4

268.9

251.5

251.5

268.5

261.6

254.6

270.7

…

…

20.0

…

0.5

20.0

…

23.8

47.4

…

29.9

Memorandum item: Programmed receipt of one-time signing bonuses and Social
Development Fund contributions from new iron ore projects 9/

1/ Performance criteria at end-December 2009 and end-June 2010 except where marked. All others indicative targets.
2/ Cumulative within each fiscal year (July 1-June 30).
3/ Beginning December 2009, an adjuster comes into force stipulating that the floor on total revenue collection will be adjusted downward by any shortfall in receipts of one-time iron ore signing bonuses and
contributions into Social Development Funds from new iron ore projects from their programmed level.
4/ Starting in September 2007, the fiscal balance, on a commitment basis, is defined as the difference between (a) total central government revenue plus budget support (excluding project grants), and (b) total current
expenditure plus investment expenditure (excluding foreign-financed investment expenditure), payment of arrears, amortization, and payments to the domestic trust fund. The program target for the floor on fiscal balance
allows for a deficit given the accumulation of surpluses in the government's account at the central bank from previous fiscal years.
5/ Indicative target. Social and other priority spending is defined as the fiscal expenditure on the four basic pillars of PRS spending defined in the Liberian Poverty Reduction Strategy paper, 2008.
6/ Excluding the arrears arising from the current debt outstanding.
7/ Cumulative; calendar year basis.
8/ From December 2009, CBL's net foreign exchange position includes SDR holdings and is based on the scheduled disbursement on the current ECF-supported program. In the event of delays to ECF disbursements
the floor would adjust down automatically.
9/ Cumulative; fiscal year basis.

45

Ceiling on payments arrears (continuous basis)

Table 1b. Liberia: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, FY2011
(Millions of US dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Sep. 10

Dec. 10

Mar. 11

Jun. 11

Program

Program

Projection

Projection

48.2

Performance criteria and indicative targets 1/
Fiscal 2/
103.1

210.6

294.5

Floor on social and other priority spending (percent of total revenue and grants collected, indicative target) 4/
Ceiling on new noncash tax/duty payment to the central government (continuous basis)

…

65.0

…

65.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on new domestic arrears/payables of the central government (continuous basis) 5/
Ceiling on new external arrears of the central government (continuous basis)

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Ceiling on non-concessional external borrowing of the public sector (continuous basis) 6/
Ceiling on gross borrowing by the public sector in foreign currency 7/

0.0
46.0

0.0
46.0

0.0
46.0

0.0
46.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

0.0

Floor on total revenue collection of the central government

3/

Ceiling on new domestic borrowing of the central government

8/

CBL
Ceiling on payments arrears (continuous basis)
Floor on CBL’s net foreign exchange position 8/, 9/
8/, 10/

Ceiling on net domestic assets of the CBL (indicative target) 8/, 11/
Memorandum item: Programmed receipt of one-time signing bonuses and Social Development Fund
contributions from new iron ore projects 2/
Memorandum item: Programmed receipt of external budget support and ratified concession payments

2/

0.0

0.0

274.5

…

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-37.7

-28.1

…

…

0.0

0.0

37.4

42.5

11.0

27.8

54.4

92.6

1/ Performance criteria at end-December 2010 except where marked and indicative targets at end-September 2010.
2/ Cumulative within each fiscal year (July 1-June 30).
3/ Beginning December 2009, an adjuster comes into force stipulating that the floor on total revenue collection will be adjusted downward by any shortfall in receipts of one-time iron ore signing bonuses and
contributions into Social Development Funds from new iron ore projects from their programmed level.
4/ Indicative target. Social and other priority spending is defined as the fiscal expenditure on the four basic pillars of PRS spending defined in the Liberian Poverty Reduction Strategy paper, 2008.
5/ Excluding the arrears arising from the current debt outstanding.
6/ The public sector comprises the central government, the CBL, public enterprises, and other official sector entities.
7/ This is set at the US dollar term on the basis of net present value of debt to 2010 GDP.
8/ Bridge financing from the CBL is available under the program for shortfalls in programmed receipt of external budget support and ratified concession signature payments up to a maximum of US$20
million. In this event, floors will adjust downwards and ceilings adjust upwards by the extent this financing is utilized, up to a maximum of US$20 million.
9/ From December 2009, CBL's net foreign exchange position includes SDR holdings and is based on the scheduled disbursement on the ECF program. In the event of delays to ECF disbursements, the
floor would adjust down by the cumulated amount of financing relative to the programmed schedule of disbursements.
10/ Cumulative change from June 30, 2010.
11/ Indicative target. The net domestic assets of the CBL are defined as base money minus the net foreign assets of the CBL converted into the U.S. dollars at program exchange rates.

46

Ceiling on CBL's gross credit to central government

0.0
264.6

47
Table 2. Structural Benchmarks, Dec. 2009–February 2011
Measures

Target Dates

Justification

Status
October 25, 2010

National Accounts establishment survey
completed.

EndDecember 2009

Debt management software installed to
support data storage, analysis, reporting
and interface between the CBL and the
Ministry of Finance.

EndDecember 2009

Met with delay.
Revised survey
completed April 2010.
Met with delay.
Interface still to be
completed.

Two successive quarterly implementation
reports of the PFM law circulated to
legislature, cabinet, GAC and development
partners.

End-April 2010

Remove the import permit declaration
requirement for imports covered by
ASYCUDA. (A positive list containing a
limited number of goods that are subject to
price controls or affect national security
will require clearance by the Ministry of
Commerce.)
Treasury bill auction regulation adopted by
the CBL Board and publicized.

End-June 2010

Urgently needed to monitor
program performance and post
conflict recovery
Critical safeguard against the
re-accumulation of
unsustainable debt after
Liberia’s exit from the HIPC
process
Implementing PFM reforms
and legislation is critical for
delivering government services
and mobilizing external
support for the budget
Removes a cumbersome
administrative barrier that
raises operating costs and
prices through effective
reduction of competition.

Met. Approved and
issued by the CBL
board in June 2010.

Direct salary payments to banks for all
Monrovia-based civil servants.

End-June 2010

Develop domestic capital
market, provide an instrument
for short-term domestic
financing, and facilitate dedollarization.
Reduce scope for fraud and
encourage monetization and
de-dollarization.

Compilation of a comprehensive
computerized asset registry by the General
Services Agency of all ministries and
agencies.

End-June 2010

Enhance transparency and
accountability of fiscal
operation.

Publication of validated national accounts
data for 2008 by the Statistical agency
LISGIS

End-September
2010
(rephased to
February 2011)

Provision of critical data for
economic surveillance and
macroeconomic policy.

Extend ASYCUDA system to the
Monrovia oil terminal and international
airport
Regular quarterly reporting of state owned
enterprise financial operations to Ministry
of Finance.

End-December
2010

Trade facilitation and tax
administration enhancement.

Ongoing

End-January 2011

Essential for program
monitoring of public sector
borrowing.

Ongoing

End-June 2010

Met with delay in June
2010.

Not met. Implemented
with delay in
September 2010.

Met. All Monroviabased civil servants in
ministries as well as
civil servants in 8 of
15 counties paid by
direct bank payment.
Not Met. Electronic
inventory completed
for 85 of 89 ministries
and agencies as of June
1, 2010.
Not met. Source data
are under validation

48
ATTACHMENT II. LIBERIA: AMENDMENT TO THE TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING
This memorandum sets out the understandings between the Liberian authorities and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) regarding amendments to the Technical Memorandum of
Understanding (TMU) attached to the Letter of Intent dated June 7, 2010. The TMU is amended
for changes to the total revenue collection adjustor (paragraph 3) and the external financing
adjustor (paragraph 19).
I. DEFINITIONS
3.
The program floor on total revenue collection will be adjusted downward to the
extent that signing bonuses and payments into Social Development Funds from new iron ore
projects fall short of the program schedule, cumulative within the fiscal year
Program Schedule for Cumulative Signing Bonuses and
Social Development Fund Payments from New Iron Ore
Projects, 2010/11
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
December 2010
March 2011
June 2011

0.0
37.4
42.5

19.
External financing adjustor. The program ceilings for CBL gross credit to government
and CBL net domestic assets will be adjusted upward and the program floor on the net foreign
exchange position of the CBL will be adjusted downward, by the amount of the difference
between actual and programmed external budget support and ratified concession signature
payments. The adjuster will be calculated on a cumulative basis from July 1, 2010.
Cumulative Program External Budget Support and
Ratified Concession Signature Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
December 2010

27.8

March 2011

54.4

June 2011

92.6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LIBERIA
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation and Fifth Review Under the
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility
Informational Annex
Prepared by African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
November 22, 2010



Relations with the Fund. Describes financial and technical assistance from the
Fund and provides information on the safeguards and assessment and exchange
rate system. Outstanding purchases and loans amounted to SDR 24.38 million
(18.87 percent of quota) at end-September 2010.



Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11.



Statistical Issues. Assessment of the quality of the statistical data. Weaknesses in
national accounts statistics are hampering the analysis of economic developments
in the country.

Contents
I.

Page

Relations with the Fund ......................................................................................................2

II. Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11 ..............................................................6
III. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................7

2

II. Liberia—Relations with the Fund
(As of October 31, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: March 28, 1962

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve Tranche Position

Article XIV

SDR Million
129.20
129.18
0.03

%Quota
100.00
99.99
0.02

III. SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
123.98
132.23

%Allocation
100.00
106.66

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
ECF Arrangements

SDR Million
24.38

%Quota
18.87

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Date of
Arrangement
Mar 14, 2008
ECF 1/
EFF
Mar 14, 2008
Stand-By
Dec 07, 1984
1/
Formerly PRGF

Expiration Date
Mar 13, 2011
Sep 25, 2008
Dec 06, 1985

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
239.02
342.77
42.78

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
230.14
342.77
8.50

VI. Projected Payments to Fund2/
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
2010
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2011
0.00
0.00

Forthcoming
2012
0.06
0.06

2013
0.06
0.06

2014
2.10
0.06
2.16

2/

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the
amount of such arrears will be shown in this section.

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed
By all creditors (US$ Million) 1/
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ Million)

Enhanced Framework
March 2008
2,739.20
721.10

3
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date

440.90
June 2010

II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR Million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income 2/
Total disbursements

440.90
30.14
410.76
10.99
451.89

1/

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at
the completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV
terms at the decision point. Hence these two amounts cannot be added.

2/

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point
corresponding to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not
disbursed during the interim period.

VIII. Delivery of Debt Relief at the Completion Point:
I. Debt relief (SDR Million)
Financed by: Liberia Administered Account
Remaining HIPC resources

548.53
116.20
432.33

II. Debt relief by facility (SDR Million)
Delivery Date
June 2010

GRA
342.77

Eligible Debt
PRGT
205.76

Total
548.53

IX. Safeguards Assessment
An updated safeguards assessment of the Central Bank of Liberia (CBL) was completed in
August 2008. The update found that the CBL had largely addressed the measures to increase
transparency recommended by the 2007 interim safeguards assessment. Some significant risks
remained, however, and were addressed subsequently, including the assumption of
co–signing authority for CBL financial matters by the Fund-supported Special Advisor who
completed his assignment at CBL in October 2009. The assessment also found that internal audit
capacity was weak and that the Audit Committee was not exercising effective oversight of CBL
financial reporting, audit, and control systems. A priority measure to engage its external auditor
to conduct special periodic audits of the monetary data reported to the fund has been adopted by
the CBL. The report for the six months ending June 30, 2010 indicated that key processes and
controls over the reporting of the monetary data to IMF were adequate and no design or operating
deficiencies were reported. Against this background, the monetary data reporting package audit
was handed over to the CBL internal audit department, beginning with the second half of 2010.
The CBL has also made progress in implementing other safeguards recommendations, including

4
development of investment guidelines for CBL foreign exchange reserves. Staff will continue to
monitor developments in the CBL’s safeguards framework.
X.

Exchange Rate Arrangement

Liberia maintains an exchange rate system that is free of restrictions on payments for current and
capital transfers. The currency of Liberia is the Liberian dollar. The U.S. dollar is also legal
tender. Since the beginning of 2009, the Liberian dollar has fluctuated more against the U.S.
dollar. As a result, the classification of the de facto exchange rate arrangement is classified as
‘other managed’. Liberia’s exchange rate at end-September 2010 was L$72.5=US$1.
XI. Article IV Consultation
The 2008 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Monrovia during
October 20–31, 2008 in Monrovia. The staff report (Country Report No. 09/4, 1/13/09) was
discussed by the Executive Board on December 22, 2008 and is posted on the IMF website. For
the 2010 Article IV consultation discussions, a staff mission visited Monrovia during
September 21–October 1, 2010.
XII. Technical Assistance 2008–10
Subject

Department

Date

Customs Administration

FAD

January 2008

Revenue Administration and
Tax Administration

FAD

April 2008

Reforms and Technical Assistance Needs

FAD

February 2009

PFM—Drafting Regulations

FAD

February–March 2009

Fiscal Decentralization

FAD

February–March 2009

Balance of Payments

STA

January 2008

Banking Supervision

MCM

September 2008

Accounting

MCM

January 2009

Monetary Operations

MCM

March 2009

GFS

STA

April–May 2009

PFM Regulations Drafting

FAD

May 2009

FAD

May 2009

Review of Revenue Administration

Revenue Authority, Customs and Tax
Administration

5
Subject

Department

Date

Legal Drafting

LEG

May 2009

Foreign Exchange Operations

MCM

June 2009

PFM

FAD

June 2009

Accounting Standards

MCM

August–September 2009

Tax Administration

FAD

September 2009

Banking Supervision

MCM

September–October 2009

Monetary Operations

MCM

October 2009

Tax Policy

FAD

November 2009

Monetary Finance Statistics

STA

March–April 2010

National Accounts

STA

April 2010

Central Bank Accounting Standards

MCM

May 2010

Monetary Operations

MCM

June–July 2010

Revenue Administration

FAD

July 2010

Fiscal Law—Drafting Tax Legislation

FAD

July 2010

National Accounts

STA

July–August 2010

Banking Supervision

MCM

August 2010

PFM

FAD

October 2010

Banking Supervision

MCM

February 2007–August
2008

Payment Systems

MCM

April 2007–October 2007

Long-term Advisor for the CBL

MCM

August 2007–October 2009

Public Financial Management

FAD

July 2008–Present

Resident Advisors

XIII. Resident Representative
A resident representative has been posted in Monrovia since April 2, 2006. Mr. Sobolev assumed
the position in July 2009 replacing Mr. Tharkur.

6
II. Liberia—Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11
(As of end-September 2010)
Title

1. World
Bank work
program

2. IMF
work
program

3. Work
jointly
performed

Fund
request to
Bank
Bank
request to
Fund

Products

Expected
delivery date
A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
1. Liberia Poverty Assessment
January 2010
September 2011
2. Fourth Reengagement and
November 2010
September 2011
Reform Support Program
(RRSPIV)
3. Poverty Reduction Strategy November 2010
June 2011
Support
4. Policy Note on Concessions
October 2010
June 2011
5. Economic Governance and
Institutional Reform Project
1. Fourth Review of ECF
2. Fifth Review of ECF
3. Assist authorities in setting up
macroeconomic framework tool
1. Joint Workshop with senior
legislatures on infrastructure
financing and debt
2. Assist the authorities in
developing MTEF/PSIP
framework for 2011/12 budget

Timing of mission

Ongoing (Phase 1)
Policy discussions

Concept stage
Concept Stage

November 2010

August 30, 2011

Ongoing

April 2010
October 2010

Mid-2010
December 2010

Completed June 2010
Scheduled December
2010

January 2011
April 2010

Mid-2010

October 2010
April 2011
(Bank)
February 2011
(Fund)
3. Assist the authorities in
July 2010 (Fund)
February 2011
compiling 2008 National
October 2010
Accounts
(Bank)
February 2011
(Fund)
B. Requests for work program inputs
1. Assistance in elaborating and
2011
Not decided
delivering financial sector
development program
1. Regular updates of
performance under the Fundsupported program and
macroeconomic projections.
2. IMF Relations Note

Status

Continuous

As needed

Delayed to February
2011.
Ongoing

Ongoing

Last update September
2010

7

III. Liberia—Statistical Issues
As of November 1, 2010
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data have serious shortcomings that significantly hamper surveillance.
Shortcomings are most serious in the areas of national accounts and balance of payments
statistics.
National Accounts: Comprehensive national accounts data are not available. Fund staff
estimate GDP by sector using the production approach and primary source data provided by
the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services. Estimates for GDP by
expenditure are not available. Consequently, there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding
estimates of the level and growth rate of real GDP, sectoral components, and all ratios to
nominal GDP. The national business register and National Accounts questionnaires were
established in December 2008. A second round of national accounts establishment survey has
been completed after low response rates from the first one and data are being compiled. The
Fund is currently providing TA in this area with verifying and validating the source data, but
there are challenges to estimating informal sector activities. Liberia participates in the
National Accounts Module of the Enhanced Data Dissemination Initiative (EDDI), which
aims to strengthen annual national accounts, and to develop producer price indices. An
upward revision of GDP is expected in early 2011 after methodological issues have been
addressed.
Price statistics: A consumer price index for Monrovia has been compiled since 2005. The
Harmonized Consumer Price Index providing national coverage was officially adopted in
2007.
Government finance statistics: The Ministry of Finance regularly provides the African
Department with monthly disaggregated data on government revenue and on government
current and capital expenditure on a cash and commitment basis. However, there is a number
of areas where the government finance statistics need to be improved: reporting financing
items and expenditures on domestic debt and arrears; lack of legal framework to collect
statistics; limited data sharing and coordination among data producing agencies; inconsistent
institutional coverage of the statistics with other datasets (e.g. national accounts and
monetary statistics); omission of nonmonetary transactions; limited data on stocks of
financial assets and liabilities; and incorrect reference exchange rate to convert data from
Liberian dollars to U.S. dollars .
Monetary statistics: Data provision in this area is adequate for surveillance. The Central
Bank of Liberia has made progress in adopting the statistical methodology recommended by
the IMF’s Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual (MFSM). However, the report of
monetary and financial statistics (MFS) has been suspended since June 2009. A STA mission
in March 2010 assisted authorities in advancing to introduce standardized report forms of
MFS and collecting data from commercial banks in accordance with the methodology in the
MFSM.

8
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance (continued)
Balance of payments: Reporting is not comprehensive, and Fund staff prepare provisional
balance of payments statistics for surveillance. Although some progress in the collecting and
reporting of data have been made with STA support, there still remain several areas that need
improvement: primary source data, compilation, and timeliness in data dissemination,
especially for trade and services, foreign direct investment, government expenditures,
remittances, and nonresident deposits data.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Participant in the General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS) since
October 2005.

Liberia has not yet received a mission to
produce the Data Module of the Reports on
the Observance of Standards and Codes (data
ROSC).

III. Reporting to STA (Optional)
The authorities report annual balance of payments data to the IFS and the BOPSY, but do not
report the government statistics to the GFSY.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/157
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 8, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with
Liberia
On December 8, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Liberia.1
Background
Since the last Article IV consultation at end-2008, the authorities have instituted far reaching
institutional and legal changes in public financial management, debt management, budget
process, tax policy, and tax administration. In the financial sector, a raft of legal and
regulatory improvements was implemented aimed at strengthening financial sector stability,
increasing intermediation, and expanding access to financial services. The Legislature has
approved a comprehensive Public Financial management Act, a new Commercial Code,
and significant changes to the Revenue Code.
The implementation of the Liberia Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) adopted in 2008 has
been satisfactory. Implementation progress was slow during the first year but the authorities
stepped up their efforts to bring PRS implementation back on track through a series of 90day action plans. The second year implementation report of the PRS covering the period to
April 2010 reports an increase of the implementation rate of deliverables to 80 percent, from
20 percent in the first year.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm

2
Over the past two years strong macroeconomic policies, strengthened institutions, and debt
relief have stabilized the economy and supported confidence building. Many vulnerabilities
remain.
While medium-term prospects are bright, notably in the commodity export sectors, broadbased growth is necessary to reduce high levels of under employment and widespread
poverty. To this end, future commodity revenues would need to be channeled to
infrastructure financing and capacity building to enhance competitiveness. Financial sector
development would help support the private sector. Further reforms are necessary to
remove structural impediments to growth, notably of property rights and land tenure.
After a slowdown in 2009, economic activity is strengthening in 2010 with subdued inflation
and a stable exchange rate. Real GDP growth is expected to rise from 4½ percent in 2009
to 6 percent in 2010. Exports have rebounded on account of rising rubber and timber
production. Foreign direct investment is on the upswing and new investment commitments
have also increased following the ratification of several new iron ore and palm oil
concession agreements.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Liberian authorities for their continued satisfactory
implementation of the Fund-supported program. Directors noted that the authorities’ prudent
macroeconomic policies, strengthened institutions, and debt relief had contributed to
macroeconomic stability and laid the basis for faster economic growth. They stressed that,
while the medium-term prospects are generally favorable, reflecting the expected boost in
mineral exports, significant challenges stemming from volatile commodity prices and large
development needs will need to be tackled to put the economy on a sustainable, high
growth path.
Directors supported the authorities’ new development strategy aimed at inclusive growth,
capacity building, financial sector development, and infrastructure investment. They
emphasized the importance of prioritizing infrastructure projects and safeguarding the
recently-achieved debt sustainability. In this regard, it is critical to strengthen project
implementation capacity, including in the areas of project appraisal, procurement, and
execution, as well as internal audit and control. Directors also encouraged the authorities to
focus greater attention on securing property rights, resolving land ownership disputes, and
maintaining social stability.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment to strengthen public financial management
and limit debt creation. They saw scope for more effective engagement with bilateral and
multilateral partners to generate infrastructure funding, as well as opportunities for greater
involvement of the private sector in infrastructure provision. They stressed that future
concession revenues should be deployed effectively to improve infrastructure and
strengthen the human capital base.

3
Directors agreed that monetary policy should aim to sustain adequate foreign exchange
reserves. They noted that the launch of the treasury bill market would improve liquidity
management and boost demand for the use of the Liberian dollar. This in turn, should help
broaden the scope for an active monetary policy. They agreed that enhancing Liberia’s
export competitiveness could not be based on exchange rate adjustment, given the high
level of dollarization in the economy, and encouraged the authorities to press ahead with
the necessary structural reforms to improve the business climate.
Directors considered it important to strengthen the level of financial intermediation and
services in support of private sector growth. They encouraged the authorities to seek
solutions with the financial community to improve access to financial services. Directors
noted that the successful conclusion of debt buyback with the remaining commercial
creditors and the agreement with Paris Club creditors on the full cancellation of remaining
debt had sharply reduced Liberia’s debt vulnerabilities. They urged that every effort should
also be made to secure the remaining outstanding pledges from members towards the
Fund’s contribution to debt relief for Liberia.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency
of the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent
of the country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board
discussions of Article IV consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of
developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex post
assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also
issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Liberia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–10
2006

2007

2008

2009
Prel.

2010
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless
otherwise indicated)
National account and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator (US dollars)

7.8

9.4

7.1

4.6

6.3

3.5

12.0

7.3

-1.2

4.5

603.8

739.9

850.7

879.0

976.6

7.2

13.7

17.5

7.4

7.4

Exports, f.o.b.

44.1

28.6

22.2

-39.7

34.8

Imports, f.o.b

44.0

13.0

42.2

-20.6

16.8

Terms of trade (deterioration -)

54.5

-11.9

-8.1

-9.4

66.1

Average exchange rate (local currency per U.S. dollar)

58.0

61.3

63.2

68.3

…

Gross official reserves (millions of US dollars)

46.5

85.3

107.8

312.2

317.1

0.5

0.8

0.8

3.2

2.6

6.5

73.3

39.5

13.5

22.6

6.6

73.6

36.7

5.2

30.2

Total expenditure and net lending

-19.5

100.2

60.2

26.3

13.4

Of which: current expenditure

-12.0

84.1

62.9

24.2

16.4

-65.5

354.3

43.4

41.5

-6.2

Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)
Consumer prices (annual average)
External sector

Import coverage of reserves (months) 1/
Central government operations 2/
Total revenue and grants
Of which: total revenue

capital expenditure
Money and credit
Reserve money

23.9

26.7

13.1

12.4

-3.2

Broad money (M2) 3/

35.1

43.2

45.7

37.7

1.9

Credit to private sector

41.7

39.2

44.1

31.5

11.1

(Percent of GDP)
External sector
Current account balance
(including official grants)

-13.9

-31.4

-57.3

-36.8

-40.4

(excluding official grants)

-199.6

-177.9

-185.3

-148.2

-152.0

-46.3
26.8

-39.3
28.1

-53.4
29.9

-46.6
17.4

-46.1
21.2

-73.1

-67.4

-83.3

-64.0

-67.3

14.9

22.1

26.0

27.2

31.0

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b
Central government operations 2/
Total revenue and grants

14.8

21.9

25.2

24.4

29.6

Total expenditure and net lending

Of which: total revenue

10.7

18.3

24.8

28.8

30.4

Of which: current expenditure

10.1

15.8

21.8

24.9

27.0

capital expenditure

0.6

2.5

3.0

3.9

3.4

Overall fiscal balance (including grants)

4.2

3.8

1.2

-1.6

0.6

Public external debt
783.7
594.5
376.6
190.9
8.9
Sources: Liberian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding imputed UN military services imports.
2/ Fiscal year ending in June on a cash basis (debt service payments shown after all debt relief).
3/ Defined as Liberian currency outside banks plus demand, time, and savings deposits in Liberian and US dollars.

Press Release No. 10/479
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 8, 2010

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes Fifth Review Under Extended Credit Facility for
Liberia and Approves US$ 6.82 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the fifth
review of Liberia’s economic performance under a program supported by an Extended Credit
Facility (ECF) arrangement. The completion of the review enables the immediate
disbursement of an amount equivalent to SDR 4.44 million (about US$6.82 million),
bringing total disbursements under the arrangement to SDR 234.58 million (about
US$360.37 million).
The three year ECF arrangement for Liberia was approved in March 2008, for an amount of
SDR 239.02 million (about US$367.19 million; see Press Release No. 08/52). The Executive
Board also completed the 2010 Article IV Consultation. A Public Information Notice will be
published in due course.
Following the Executive Board’s discussion of Liberia, Mr. John Lipsky, First Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, made the following statement:
“The Liberian authorities have continued to implement prudent macroeconomic policies and
to advance structural reforms under their IMF-supported economic program. The balanced
budget principle was maintained during the 2009–10 financial year, with revenue shortfalls
linked to the global economic crisis being matched by spending cuts. Inflation has returned to
single digits, the exchange rate has been broadly stable, and economic growth is picking up,
helped by a recovery of foreign direct investment flows.
“Significant progress has been made in implementing public financial management reforms
and adopting laws and regulations that facilitate trade and investment. Reaching the
completion point under the HIPC Initiative has laid the basis for comprehensive debt relief
and Liberia now has a modest debt burden while having space to take on new concessional
debt to finance investment projects.

2
“The macroeconomic policy framework for the current fiscal year (2010–11) is
well-conceived. The budget envisages solid revenue growth, the allocation of an increased
share of budgetary resources to poverty reduction programs, and a significant boost to public
investment. Although the balanced budget policy remains in place, this will be re-evaluated if
concessional financing and appropriate projects are identified. Monetary policy should
support low inflation and permit a modest increase in reserves.
“Over the medium term, the authorities will need to follow through with reforms aimed at
alleviating structural constraints on growth. The envisaged emphasis on infrastructure
development is appropriate, but effective execution will require that capacity in project
selection and preparation be improved, along with more efficient procurement and cash
management procedures. Continued efforts to strengthen public financial management would
complement other efforts to scale up investment effectively, while successful implementation
of planned revenue administration reforms would augment budgetary resources. Accelerated
financial sector development, and broad-based governance reform—including land tenure
and property rights—would also support rapid private sector growth over the medium term,”
Mr. Lipsky added.

Statement by Moeketsi Majoro, Executive Director for Liberia
December 8, 2010

Introduction
My Liberian authorities appreciate the IMF Executive Board and Management for their
continued engagement and support. They are grateful for the productive policy discussions
and counsel proffered by the IMF Mission during the Article IV consultation and Fifth
Review under the Extended Credit Facility. The authorities agree broadly with the staff
report as it addresses the main challenges to the successful implementation of Liberia’s
growth strategy. These challenges include gaining cost competitiveness outside the enclave
sectors, infrastructural development, strengthening institutions, and medium-term budgetary
planning in the post-HIPC period.
Recent economic developments
The Liberian economy has performed well in recent years. The economy grew on average by
6.8 percent over the last five years in response to the sound macroeconomic policy
implementation and far reaching structural reforms. Reconstruction continues to drive robust
growth, in spite of the difficult international environment. The global financial crisis had a
significant impact on the economy in 2009, impeding major foreign direct investment (FDI)
in the mining and forestry sectors. Declining commodity prices for major exports such as
rubber, iron ore, and sawn timber also contributed to the slowdown in production and
investment, impacting formal employment in the rural areas. As a result, real GDP growth
fell to an estimated 4.6 percent in 2009 from 7 percent in the preceding year.
Despite the fall in international agricultural prices, output in the agricultural and forestry
sectors remained relatively strong. Inflation in 2009 averaged 7.4 percent, having
moderated since its double digit highs in 2008, owing to prudent monetary operations and
the relatively steady prices of food and fuel. Decreases in export earnings coupled with the
decline in remittances have put pressure on the exchange rate in 2009. However, the current
account deficit is expected to be fully financed by FDI and other external inflows. Gross
international reserves of the Central Bank of Liberia (CBL) increased in 2009.
Program performance
Against the background of significant challenges, including from the global financial and
economic crises, my authorities maintained macroeconomic stability and satisfactorily
performed under the ECF-supported program. All quantitative performance criteria under the
program through end-June 2010 were met. My authorities also observed three out of four
structural benchmarks set for completion in June 2010. Completion of the remaining
benchmark, which is to computerize government asset registry, is anticipated to be met by
the end of December 2010. However, due to some unexpected constraints, the benchmark on

2
the compilation of national accounts data could not be observed. My authorities plan to
finalize the publication of the national accounts at the beginning of 2011.
Outlook
Prospects for a continued recovery of the Liberian economy remain good. Liberia’s low
economic base will present many opportunities for reconstruction, maintaining high growth
in the medium term. The continued recovery of agriculture and forestry, which accounted
for
61.5 percent of the economy in 2009, will be the main impetus to growth. Additionally, the
resumption of iron ore mining will enhance growth over the medium term, attracting large
investment as well as boosting exports. Accordingly, real GDP growth is projected to
remain fairly strong at 6.3 percent in 2010 and around 8.5 percent in 2011. In the medium
term, inflation is projected to moderate as import prices and the exchange rate stabilize. The
gross international reserves of the CBL in months of import cover is projected to decline
from 2.6 in 2010 to 2.0 in 2011, largely attributable to the expected high growth and
development-related imports.
Fiscal policy
My authorities’ fiscal strategy continues to aim at limiting debt creation and rationalizing
public financial management. In light of this, the authorities have structured the 2010/11
budget in two parts: a core government budget which reflects those revenues that are
expected to materialize and grow each year that will be used to pay for spending on core
government priorities and recurrent activities; and a project budget based upon one-off and/or
uncertain receipt that will finance one-off projects. The core budget will function as planned,
without disruption and will contain adequate investment through a capital expenditure
minimum rule. Meanwhile, projects will only start when funding has been received. The
project budget will also assist target and focus entities spending on key, specific poverty
reduction activities. Additionally, my authorities are committed to strengthening the link
between policy, medium-term planning and budgeting, and will implement the Medium
Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) over the next two years. As part of the new PRS
(National Vision), the development of sector plans aligned to the PRS will ensure that the
budget priorities are more closely aligned with poverty reduction objectives. Such sector
plans are also necessitated by the MTEF and the Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP).
Furthermore, my authorities will ensure that targeted government spending reaches its
intended recipients through the new public expenditure 3 survey, which aims to include
people from outside of government in monitoring spending. Other methods of ensuring
improved monitoring of outputs of government spending includes: activity-based
deliverables for the new PRS to be used as measurable objectives for spending entities in the
2010/11 budget; joint monitoring and evaluation by the Ministry of Economic Planning and
Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Finance; and PRS deliverables and the reporting of
policy outputs from each spending entity in annual and mid-year fiscal outturn.

3
Monetary and financial sector policies
The monetary policy objective of the CBL remained the attainment of broad exchange rate
stability in order to anchor price stability. To achieve this, the CBL continues to use the
reserve requirement ratio and the foreign exchange sale auction as the main monetary
policy instruments.
In the financial sector, the medium term strategy of the CBL is to produce a significantly
changed financial sector, which is stronger, more stable and vibrant, and a vanguard for
supporting broad-based economic growth and development. Accordingly, the emphasis of the
second phase of the CBL’s reform agenda will focus on improving financial intermediation,
building a modern payment system, intensifying work towards the establishment of a capital
market, reforming and strengthening the insurance sector as well as reforming the non-bank
financial sector including the operation of foreign exchange bureaus. Furthermore, in
collaboration with commercial banks, the CBL has established a Banking Institute,
developed the commercial code and the legislation for the establishment of a commercial
court. CBL is also working with banks and the Liberian Institute of Certified Public
Accountants to train the staff of banking institutions as a prelude to the implementation by
banks of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), as required by CBL by end2012.
Debt management policy
With the attainment of HIPC completion point, the authorities intend to move from a noborrowing policy as was required under the HIPC arrangement, to the resumption of
borrowing in order to finance its national reconstruction and development activities. Such
borrowing will be consistent with maintaining a sustainable debt position starting this fiscal
year. The development of a domestic debt market through sale and issuance of treasury bills
is on the way, coupled with new responsibilities of the Debt Management Unit as required by
the PFM law and regulation. As contained in the Debt Management Strategy (DMS), all
loans will be approved and monitored by the Debt Management Committee and are to adhere
to the reporting requirements set out in the PFM. The authorities will also implement and
enforce fiscal rules as contained in the DSM. These rules are: to hold the level of debt stock
below 60 percent of GDP and earmark borrowing only for investment purposes to ensure
intergenerational fairness in the budget process. Furthermore, the government is committed
to fully and vigorously implement its National Debt Management Strategy as well as build
the institutional and professional capacity of the Debt Management Unit in the Ministry of
Finance.
Structural reforms
In order to consolidate the gains of macroeconomic stability in the post-HIPC period and
boost growth, my authorities remain committed to the full implementation of the ongoing
structural reforms, to enhance the efficiency of the economy and improve the business

4
climate. My authorities remain steadfast in their efforts to improve PFM, debt management,
budget process, tax policy, and tax administration. The direct deposit payment of central
government civil servant salaries has markedly expanded and covers the whole city of
Monrovia and some rural counties. Plans are on the way to include the remaining sectors of
government as well as exploring other means for government employees in the more remote
areas. Additionally, efforts to regularize payrolls have expanded to cover 15 ministries, with
substantial savings from eliminating fraudulent payments. Furthermore, an integrated
financial management information system will be the basis for government accounting,
incorporating the new chart of accounts from July 1, 2011.
In the financial sector, various legal and regulatory reforms were carried out to strengthen the
sector’s stability, increase intermediation and widen access to financial services. In addition,
the legislature also approved a new commercial code to establish a commercial court and
changes to the revenue code.
Conclusion
My Liberian authorities remain mindful of the importance of prudent fiscal and monetary
policies as well as debt sustainability to achieve and maintain macroeconomic stability and
sustain growth. In this respect, they will continue to implement appropriate revenue and
expenditure measures that will help enhance the fiscal space as the key to addressing the
large infrastructural deficit of the country as well as increasing employment and pro-poor
spending. My authorities appreciate the continued support of Management and development
partners in realizing their development goals. It is against this background that the authorities
solicit the Executive Board’s support in completing the fifth review under the ECF
arrangement.

