March 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/58

© 2010 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Morocco: 2009 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Morocco
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the Article IV consultation with Morocco, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2009 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on November 13, 2009, with the officials of Morocco on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on December 23, 2010. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its January 25, 2010 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Morocco.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
MOROCCO
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2009 Consultation with Morocco
Approved by Amor Tahari (MCD) and Thomas Dorsey (SPR)
December 23, 2009

http://www.imf.org/external/country/ma
r/index.htm. In recent consultations, the
Fund and the authorities have agreed on
the broad policy priorities, which have
included medium-term fiscal
consolidation, reform of the subsidy
system, and an eventual move to a more
flexible monetary and exchange rate
regime. Prior to the crisis, the Fund had
encouraged a more rapid pace of fiscal
consolidation.
The 2009 Article IV consultation
discussions with Morocco took place
in Rabat during November 2–13,
2009. The mission met with Minister
Mezouar (Economy and Finance),
Governor Jouahri (Bank Al-Maghrib),
Minister Delegate Baraka (Economic
and General Affairs), and other senior
officials, as well as with representatives
from labor unions, academics, and the
financial and private sectors. The staff
team comprised Messrs./Mmes. Lewis
(head), Sab, and Florea (all MCD) and
Funke (FAD). Mr. Daïri, Alternate
Executive Director for Morocco, joined
the meetings.
The last Article IV consultation was
concluded on July 23, 2008.

Morocco has accepted the obligations
of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4,
and maintains an exchange system free
of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers on current
international transactions.

2
Contents

Page

Overview ....................................................................................................................................3
I. Weathering the Global Crisis .................................................................................................5
II. Continued Headwinds in the Short Term ..............................................................................7
III. Looking Ahead: Boosting Growth and Improving Living Standards................................11
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–14 ..............................................................................22
2. Central Government Finance (in billions of dirhams), 2007–14 .........................................23
3. Central Government Finance (in percent of GDP), 2007–14 ..............................................24
4. Balance of Payments, 2007–14 ............................................................................................25
5. Monetary Survey, 2004–10..................................................................................................26
6. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004–14 .............................................................27
7. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004–14 .....................................................29
Figures
1. Cross-Country Comparisons: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008 ....................................20
2. Real Effective Exchange Rate and Competitiveness Developments ...................................21
3. External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests ..........................................................................28
4. Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests .............................................................................30
Boxes
1. Spillovers from Europe to Morocco’s Economy .................................................................18
2. Contribution of the Public Enterprise Sector to the Economic Stimulus.............................19

3

Overview
The direct impact of the global crisis on Morocco has been limited, primarily affecting
Morocco through real channels. Exports, tourism receipts, remittances, and FDI have all
declined this year, due primarily to the slowdown in Europe. Nonetheless, with a strong
starting position, reflecting in large part the range of macroeconomic and structural
reforms introduced over the last decade, Morocco has been well-positioned to weather and
respond to the crisis. In particular, Morocco’s financial system is sound, with little
exposure to international markets.
The authorities have responded appropriately to the worsened outlook. A moderate
loosening of fiscal and monetary policies, coupled with vigilant financial sector
supervision, has supported confidence and domestic demand, while minimizing risks. As
well, the continued implementation of structural reforms has signaled that investment and
growth prospects will remain robust. Morocco remains subject to climatic conditions, and
in 2009, these brought an exceptional crop year. In this context, real GDP growth in 2009
should be strong.
The challenge for 2010 will be to continue efforts to support economic activity in the face
of headwinds from a weak external environment. Risks to growth are weighted to the
downside, although if Europe turns around more quickly than envisaged, nonagricultural
growth in Morocco could be higher. In this setting, the authorities plan a further
temporary widening of the fiscal deficit, with spending increases focused appropriately on
capital rather than current spending. Tax policy reforms to further lower income taxes will
hopefully encourage more informal sector participation in the formal sector tax net.
The strong credit growth of recent years in the banking system has slowed to a more
moderate pace. However, after a sharp fall in recent years, nonperforming loans are likely
to pick up moderately given the economic slowdown; thus, the authorities’ vigilance in this
area is warranted. The authorities’ close attention to the capital requirements of the
banking system is timely and continuing implementation of Basle II is welcome.
Turning to the medium term, Morocco’s long-standing challenges will again come to the
fore as the global crisis and the attendant policy response recede. The authorities’ objective
is to boost growth to improve living standards and address the persistent issue of high
youth unemployment, but they face a more subdued outlook. Potential growth of external
demand, notably in Europe, has been revised downward. At the same time, competitiveness
is a concern, and more broadly, a strategy for growth hinging on domestic demand—as
has been the case in Morocco in recent years—may not generate the desired growth rates
over the medium and long term.

4
Maintaining macroeconomic stability through sound fiscal policy, a notable achievement
of recent years, will remain critical. The fiscal loosening in the current period is
appropriate, but a return to fiscal consolidation—phased in gradually starting in 2011—
will be important to stabilize the public debt to GDP ratio, preserve low borrowing costs in
the economy, and ease the implementation of monetary policy.
While the current pegged exchange rate regime has served Morocco well, the authorities
maintain the medium-term objective of moving to a more flexible monetary and exchange
rate regime. Looking forward, the timing for a shift in exchange rate policy may be more
opportune. In particular, the prerequisites for a move to inflation targeting are largely in
place; the risk of imported inflation is now much less; and balance sheets in the economy
have little exposure to exchange rate movements. A more flexible regime would ease the
economy’s adjustment to shocks, and could be implemented in a manner to minimize any
increase in volatility in the economy. Paired with structural reforms, it could help address
Morocco’s competitiveness challenges, likely boosting growth rates over the medium term.
Reforms in a number of areas will likewise be central to maintaining macroeconomic
stability and boosting growth. In the public finance area, expenditure reforms to improve
the efficiency and composition of public spending will be critical to strengthening the
return on public investment in human and physical capital. The authorities’ ongoing
efforts to simplify domestic and trade taxes will also help improve tax administration and
provide better incentives for the informal sector to join the tax net. On trade liberalization,
a further reduction in top rates and greater coherence of the different regional accords will
reduce distortions.
Further structural reforms will be critical to improve productivity in the economy and
address nagging competitiveness challenges. To this end, the range of ongoing and
planned reforms to improve the business environment, strengthen physical infrastructure,
and improve the competitiveness of key sectors are welcome. In the social sphere, despite
impressive gains in recent years, a number of social indicators are still low. To this end,
strengthening education and health services will be essential.
Morocco has made significant progress over the last decade on macroeconomic stability,
economic growth, and poverty reduction. Looking ahead, the authorities and staff broadly
agreed on the key priorities. In particular, to preserve and build on the gains, in the short
term the authorities should pursue fiscal and financial sector policies that maintain
domestic demand while limiting vulnerabilities in a fragile external setting. Over the
medium term, the familiar challenges of increasing the flexibility of the economy,
strengthening competitiveness, and ultimately, raising per capita income and reducing
poverty, will require a forceful approach. The authorities have effectively responded to the
global crisis, and staff expect that they will likewise succeed in tackling these challenges.
The next Article IV consultation will be conducted on the standard 12-month cycle.

5
I. WEATHERING THE GLOBAL CRISIS
The direct impact of the global crisis on
Morocco has been limited. With little financial
exposure to international markets, strong public
finances, resilient domestic demand—due in
part to countercyclical policies—and an
exceptional crop year, real GDP growth in 2009
should be around 5 percent.
The global crisis has had a limited impact on
the financial sector


Very little or no exposure to toxic assets;



Low external debt for banks, households,
and corporations (FX-loans represent only
2.4 percent of total loans); also, low public
external debt, with limited rollover and
interest rate risks;



Sound and well capitalized financial system,
with limited linkages to international
financial markets, including restrictions on
capital outflows;



Bank funding largely based on deposits and
activity dominated by domestic credit;



Stable equity participation. Foreign
participation on the equity market is just
over one-quarter of the total, and almost all
is strategic. Over 70 percent of individual
investors are Moroccan residents abroad;



While there may be a slowdown in some
specific investment projects, the direct
impact on Morocco of the recent events
linked to Dubai World is expected to be
small. Moroccan banks have very limited
exposure to Dubai financial institutions and
corporate entities.

6
However, the global crisis has affected
Morocco through real channels
The impact of the crisis on Morocco has largely
been felt via the economic downturn in Europe,
its principal trading partner (Box 1). Although
most recent data suggest inflows are improving,
for the first half of 2009 relative to the same
period in 2008, exports were down by 34
percent, tourism receipts and remittances fell by
14 and 12 percent respectively, and FDI was
also down by 34 percent.
Nonetheless, economic activity in 2009 has
been resilient, in part due to strong initial
conditions, resulting from the reforms of
recent years
Reforms over the last decade have boosted
nonagricultural growth and strengthened the
economy’s resilience to shocks, enabling
Morocco to limit the impact of the crisis. In
particular, the macroeconomic gains—marked
by low inflation, low fiscal deficits, and a
declining public debt ratio—and structural
reforms to improve the flexibility of the
economy have given Morocco greater room for
maneuver in its policy response (Figure 1).
A strong policy response helped Morocco
weather the crisis
The authorities responded quickly to the
unfolding crisis and have been successful in
maintaining confidence and domestic demand.
In particular, the fiscal balance will shift from a
small surplus in 2008 to a deficit of about
2½ percent of GDP in 2009 as the authorities
proceed with already-planned fiscal reforms (tax
rate reductions and increases in wages for the
lower end of the civil servant salary scale), a
boost in public investment, and targeted support
to key sectors—for example, publicly-supported

7
training programs and a temporary reduction in
payroll taxes for enterprises in affected sectors.
Revenue fell sharply—reflecting the economic
downturn, the tax policy changes, and also the
absence of certain one-off factors present in
2008—but this was in part offset by a fall in
subsidies due to lower world commodity prices.
With inflationary pressures low, the central
bank—Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM)—likewise
lowered its key policy rate by 25 basis points,
and to boost liquidity, gradually reduced reserve
requirements from 15 to 8 percent in 2009. The
stock market remains well below its highs in
early-2008, but the fall in 2009 has been
moderate. Continued sizable support from
Morocco’s external partners has also served as a
source of resilience.
Climatic conditions have also played a role
Real nonagricultural GDP growth of about 2½
percent is expected for 2009. However,
Morocco is benefitting from an exceptional
cereal harvest. As a result, overall GDP growth
in 2009 is projected at around 5 percent.
II. CONTINUED HEADWINDS IN THE SHORT
TERM
Resilient domestic demand will continue to
support economic activity in 2010, but Morocco
will face headwinds from the external
environment, notably the projected slow
recovery in Europe. An exit from fiscal easing
would be premature, and to this end, the
authorities plan a further loosening of fiscal
policy. Their close attention to the financial
sector is warranted given the rapid credit
growth of recent years and uncertainties related
to the economic environment.

8
The slow recovery in Europe and a low share
of exports will mute the recovery
Growth in the euro zone, Morocco’s main
trading partner, is projected to be slightly
positive but low in 2010, contributing to a
gradual recovery of exports of goods and
services and remittances.
The authorities underlined the continuing
importance of domestic demand to economic
activity. At the same time, some of the factors
that muted the impact of the crisis on
Morocco—e.g, the low share of exports, notably
manufactures—will likely soften the upturn in
2010 relative to other countries where exports
have been a source of growth.
On balance, risks are weighted to the downside
A further deterioration in the terms of trade,
resulting from an increase in oil prices or a
decline in phosphate prices, could also delay the
recovery. Similarly, a slower rebound in tourism
and remittances due to a prolonged recovery in
the Euro area could negatively affect growth
and the current account. Upside risks are also
present, notably a more rapid recovery in
Europe.
In this setting, the authorities plan a further
fiscal loosening, with both higher spending,
lower taxes…
The consolidation of public finances in recent
years and resulting moderate public debt levels
provide room for further counter-cyclical fiscal
policy in 2010. To this end, the 2010 budget
envisages a budget deficit of 4.4 percent of
GDP, thereby providing a significant stimulus to
the economy. On the spending side, the stimulus
will come primarily from an additional increase

9
of about ½ a percent of GDP in the already high
capital expenditure. In addition, strong
investment programs in the public enterprise
sector, including in the phosphate sector, will
also boost demand (Box 2).
The tax burden will be reduced following the
implementation of the second phase of the
income tax reform, including an increase in the
income threshold of all tax brackets and reduced
tax rates. A decrease in tax revenue is also
expected from the slowdown in private sector
activity in 2009 and 2010.
…and a gradual phase-out of the universal
subsidy system, which remains a fiscal risk
Long a source of volatility and a drain on public
finances, the authorities have taken early steps
to reform the subsidy system. This should help
reduce fiscal risks while better assisting
vulnerable populations. The volume of
subsidized wheat has been reduced and a pilot
program to distribute targeted cash assistance
has been launched. Staff welcomed the
authorities’ intention to develop a global reform
program whereby universal subsidies would be
gradually eliminated in parallel with the
introduction of new targeted assistance to ensure
budget neutrality of the reforms. The authorities
noted that over the medium term, these
programs should total no more than 2 percent of
GDP.
In the financial sector, the economic slowdown
is expected to lead to a moderate increase in
nonperforming loans (NPLs)
Credit growth has averaged 23 percent per year
over the 2006–08 period, slowing to about
12 percent growth in 2009. At the same time,
the share of NPLs to total loans has fallen
sharply over the last five years, with NPLs in

10
nominal terms having remained broadly level.
The low level of NPLs reflects in part a process
of cleaning up the balance sheets of banks by
writing off old nonperforming loans that are
fully provisioned, as well as some restructuring
of problem loans, and thus does not reflect only
recent credit trends. Looking ahead, the
authorities and staff agreed that a moderate
upturn in NPLs was to be expected, and that
continued vigilance is needed.
The real estate sector warrants specific
attention
Although NPLs in the sector remain low and
provisioning is high, real estate credit, which
represents 34 percent of total loans, grew by
20 percent (y-o-y) through October, although
growth has slowed in recent months. In the short
term, the limited supply of new housing units
due to zoning restrictions will continue to
sustain prices.
The authorities are taking steps to improve
monitoring of the financial sector…
The authorities remain vigilant to credit growth.
They have launched several initiatives aimed
particularly at enhancing information. The most
important measure was establishing a credit
bureau with which financing institutions are
required to consult. The bureau, managed by a
private entity, is now operational and its
activities are continually expanding. The
authorities are also working on developing a
real estate price index and periodic surveys to
gain a better understanding of asset price
developments.

11
…and they intend to fully implement Basle II
recommendations
Measures to improve macro-prudential
regulation are moving ahead. Implementation of
Basel II continues, with priority given to Pillar
2 concerning supervision. For Pillar 1, the
standardized approach was introduced in 2007
and the authorities intend to move to the
advanced approach beginning in 2011. The
authorities have also continued strengthening
their capacity in stress testing and macroprudential analysis. The capital adequacy ratio
(CAR) requirements for banks were raised at
end-2008 from 8 to 10 percent of risk-weighted
assets. In June 2009, the average CAR for the
whole banking system was 11.7 percent, which
is above the minimal norm but still relatively
low when compared to other emerging countries
in the region. The authorities have announced
their intention to raise this ratio to 12 percent for
certain banking institutions, based on their risk
profile, while taking into account the economic
situation with the aim of avoiding pro-cyclical
effects. Staff noted that credit growth remains
brisk, and encouraged the authorities to remain
open to further adjustments to the CAR.
III. LOOKING AHEAD: BOOSTING GROWTH
AND IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS
Morocco has made significant strides over the
last decade to boost growth, improve living
standards, and reduce poverty. Nonetheless, as
concerns about the global crisis and the related
policy response recede, the need for policies to
further boost growth and improve living
standards will again come squarely into view.
Key issues include medium-term fiscal policy,
the exchange rate regime, structural reforms,
competitiveness issues, and social policies,
including youth unemployment.

Basel II Principles: The Three Pillars
Drawing lessons from the crisis, the Basel
Committee introduced several enhancements to
the Basel II framework in July 2009 and issued a
consultative paper in December 2009 with a view
to further complementing the framework.
Pillar 1: Minimum capital requirements.
Building on recent reforms to enhance the
coverage of risks subject to capital charges, the
Committee has proposed strengthening the capital
requirements for certain counterparty credit risk
exposures, and to introduce a leverage ratio.
Pillar 2: Supervisory review process.
Supervisors are expected to use judgment in
requiring individual banks to operate with a
capital buffer above Pillar 1 requirements,
reflecting their assessment of banks’ riskiness as
well as systemic considerations. Recent reforms
raised the standards of the Pillar 2 supervisory
review process with respect to banks’ firm-wide
risk management and capital planning processes.
The Committee has proposed a series of new
measures to address the pro-cyclicality of banking
systems and is currently assessing whether such
adjustments should be achieved through the Pillar
1 or Pillar 2 process.
Pillar 3: Market discipline. Banks are expected
to disclose enough information so that
counterparties, creditors, and investors will
compel them to have capital and liquidity
commensurate with risk.

12
Fiscal policy should continue to support
macroeconomic stability
Consolidation of public finances
Morocco has benefited greatly from the
macroeconomic stability and favorable
borrowing costs resulting from the fiscal
consolidation of recent years. The crisis is a
temporary phenomenon, and thus the authorities
broadly agreed with staff’s view that the public
finance framework should be set within a
medium-term outlook aimed at bringing the
deficit below 3 percent of GDP, in order to
stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio. This would ease
the burden on the monetary authorities. It would
also mitigate risks identified in the debt
sustainability analysis (Figures 3-4), in
particular those related to a growth shock or a
combined real depreciation and contingent
liabilities shocks that could raise public debt by
7-9 percentage points by 2014.
However, fiscal adjustment should be gradual
With the output gap negative (based on
nonagricultural GDP), fiscal policy has
appropriately become expansionary. A
premature withdrawal of the fiscal stimulus
could endanger the recovery. Thus, starting in
2011, staff recommended that the authorities
reduce the fiscal deficit gradually, returning to a
deficit of 3 percent of GDP by 2012–13.
Policies to adjust more quickly to the
external environment
A more subdued outlook presents challenges to
growth in Morocco
Over the medium term, global and European
growth are expected to resume at more
moderate levels, given the loss of potential

Reducing the Deficit will Require
Policy Choices
The measure of the cyclically-adjusted fiscal
balance mirrors closely the actual balance,
suggesting the role of automatic stabilizers is
small. Despite the methodological challenges in
determining the cyclically-adjusted fiscal
balance (e.g., estimating the elasticity of revenue
with respect to GDP, which shows sharp shortterm fluctuations), the change in the balance
appears to be mostly driven by discretionary
policy measures, fiscal reforms, and one-off
factors such as the surge in capital gains taxes in
recent years (followed by a drop-off in 2009). As
a result, fiscal adjustment will have to rely on
policy changes.

13
output that generally occurs following financial
crises. Moreover, a strategy for growth hinging
on domestic demand—as has been the case in
recent years in Morocco—may not generate the
desired growth rates over the medium and long
term. A continued adaptation of policies that
allow Morocco to adjust to the external outlook
would be warranted.
The current exchange rate regime has served
Morocco well. More flexibility would allow
Morocco to more easily adapt to changes in the
external environment
The peg to the basket has contributed to
macroeconomic stability, notably low inflation.
In the context of prudent financial sector
supervision, the peg has not led to a build-up of
exchange rate risk in the financial, corporate, or
household sectors. Staff analysis based on an
average from the CGER methodologies suggests
that the exchange rate is broadly in line with its
fundamentals. Other indicators, such as current
account developments and movements in pricebased indicators (Figure 2), point to a mild
appreciation of the real exchange rate in 2009.
The authorities’ medium-term objective is to
move to more flexibility in monetary and
exchange rate policies, which could help
Morocco better adapt to changes in the
international environment. In particular,
implementing an explicit inflation targeting
framework combined with increased flexibility
in the exchange rate could be beneficial,
particularly in a context where inflationary
pressures are low and the current account
deterioration is more pronounced than
previously expected. The challenges in the
current arrangement are particularly pronounced
in light of the tight relationship between the
dirham and the euro, which has substantially

14
appreciated recently, combined with a
depreciation in competitor countries.
Staff noted that the timing for a move to a
flexible regime may be opportune in the near
term
The central bank broadly meets the prerequisites
for adopting an inflation targeting framework,
with the operational independence, expertise,
and statistical resources, as well as a complete
range of instruments that it continues to refine.
Medium-term price stability is already the
priority objective of BAM, and its analytical and
operational framework resembles closely that of
central banks that have adopted explicit inflation
targets. More broadly, inflation is low, the
financial system is relatively robust, and the
fiscal situation is under control.
The authorities are concerned about greater
volatility of the exchange rate
The authorities recognize the advantages of a
more flexible regime, and they are very attentive
to the economy’s competitiveness challenges.
However, they continue to see a more flexible
regime as a medium-term objective, expressing
reservations about the likely increased volatility
from more exchange rate flexibility. They also
noted that the broader policy framework for
exchange rate policy still needs to be elaborated.
Staff noted that many countries have proved
successful in managing volatility in their
exchange rates. Staff and the authorities also
agreed that continued development of the
financial system would strengthen the
effectiveness of a more flexible monetary
framework.

Preconditions for Inflation Targeting
Morocco fulfils most of the four broad categories of
preconditions for adopting a monetary policy based
on inflation targeting:
Central Bank Infrastructure (fulfilled)
- Data availability (√)
- Systematic forecast process (√)
- Models capable of conditional forecasts (√)
Institutional Independence (fulfilled)
- Central bank independence (√)
- Absence of fiscal obligation (√)
- Operational independence (√)
- Inflation-focused mandate (√)
- Favorable fiscal balance (√)
- Low public debt (√)
Financial Development (partially fulfilled)
-

Solid capital adequacy ratio (√)
Strong stock market capitalization (√)
Depth of private bond market
Low currency mismatch faced by domestically
owned banks (√)
- Even distribution of bond maturities
Economic Structure (largely fulfilled)
-

Low exchange rate pass-through
Low sensitivity to commodity prices
Low dollarization (√)
Trade openness (√)

15
Further structural reforms to boost
productivity in the public and private
sectors
Improving the efficiency and composition of
public spending
Cross-country evidence suggests that Morocco
has some room to improve the efficiency of
public spending. Moreover, over the medium
term, continued efforts will be needed to tightly
manage current spending. This strategy would
be reinforced by a medium-term expenditure
framework. In particular, the wage bill remains
over 10 percent of GDP. The authorities are
expecting reduced wage bill pressures over the
medium term as the pace of retirements picks up
(leading to a drop in the average civil service
wage), but also because of a newly implemented
regulation whereby all vacant positions are
eliminated at the end of each budget year. A
more comprehensive civil service reform is
under discussion with the World Bank that
would both modernize the civil service, and
reduce the weight of the wage bill.
Further simplifying the tax regime
Staff encouraged the authorities to continue
their tax reform efforts, in particular by further
simplifying the tax regime, including reform of
the VAT and customs tariffs, by reducing the
number of rates and exemptions and extending
the scope of reimbursements for VAT credits.
The overhaul of VAT rates could also lead to a
reduction in the normal rate, with a neutral
impact on revenue, which could expand the tax
base through formalization of the informal
sector. More broadly, as the authorities proceed
with reforms of domestic taxation, they should
ensure that the reforms of the different taxes
create a tax regime with an appropriate level and
distribution of the overall burden on taxpayers.

16
In the same spirit, the progress in further
simplifying and liberalizing the trade regime
should continue
As measured by the WTO, the average tariff fell
to 20 percent in 2008 from 33 percent in 2002,
and the average effective tariff (customs
revenue divided by total imports) is now at
5 percent. However, Morocco would benefit
from a further lowering of top rates and more
consolidation of rates to reduce complexity and
improve administration. The mission also noted
the importance of reducing high MFN import
tax rates and of ensuring the coherence of the
different regional accords, and stressed that
further steps should not create the potential for
welfare-reducing trade diversion.
Competitiveness remains a challenge
A number of indicators suggest some erosion of
competitiveness, particularly in relation to
competitor countries, such as in Eastern Europe
(Figure 2).
Also, the deterioration of the current account in
recent years points to competitiveness
challenges. Morocco’s current account was in
surplus from 2001–06 but has since deteriorated
gradually, and has been in deficit since 2007.
Trade in goods have been in deficit but services
and transfers—mainly tourism receipts and
remittances—fully compensated for the deficits
in the trade in goods from 2001–06. More
recently, the trade balance reached a record high
deficit of 22 percent of GDP in 2008. While the
trade deficit is expected to improve in 2009, this
will largely be offset by a deterioration in
services and transfers.

Recent Developments in the Trade
Balance
Morocco’s imports have been roughly twice
exports in recent years, and thus have driven
movements in the trade balance. Price effects—
notably for energy products and raw materials—
accounted for much of the import growth through
2008, but import volumes also increased rapidly,
in particular for capital goods. For some years,
exports of goods remained relatively stable in
percent of GDP (and in terms of market share),
until 2008, when phosphate exports increased
sharply due to a price effect. In 2009, in
percentage terms, exports have fallen more than
imports, but given the much bigger weight of
imports, the trade balance is expected to improve
moderately.

17
To this end, the authorities are deepening
structural reforms to increase productivity
To build on the productivity gains of the last
decade, the authorities plan to reform the justice
system, increase infrastructure investment, and
strengthen support for industry, tourism, and
energy. In addition, the Plan Vert, which aims to
increase agriculture yields, is moving ahead, and
more recently the government launched a
similar effort to expand the country's fishing
sector.
Despite impressive gains, important social
challenges remain
The poverty rate has fallen from 15 percent in
2001 to 9 percent in 2007, and overall
unemployment has likewise fallen in recent
years. However, youth unemployment has
proven more difficult to tackle, and literacy
rates and other social indicators remain low
relative to other countries of similar income.
To address these challenges, in 2005, the
authorities launched the « Initiative nationale du
développement humain », a program of more
than $1 billion over 5 years. In this context, the
authorities are reforming the education and
health sectors, the success of which will be a
key element of improving living standards and
boosting Morocco’s potential growth. For
instance, the authorities aim to universalize
basic education by 2015 by improving
enrollment and completion rates. They also aim
to increase graduation and employment rates
and expand vocational training. On health, the
government intends to reduce infant and
maternal mortality rates by developing a
universally acceptable care package. In all these
areas, the authorities are working closely with
development partners, including the World
Bank.

18
Box 1. Spillovers from Europe to Morocco’s Economy
Europe (especially France and Spain), plays an important role on Morocco’s economy, given the
country’s geographical position, historical and cultural ties, as well a significant emigration.

Econometric estimations using series of quarterly GDP data for Morocco and Europe suggest that the
correlation between the two economies is significant. This correlation has strengthened since 2000,
when the Association Agreement between Morocco and the European Union (EU) entered into force.

Moreover, an impulse response function estimated using a simple auto-regression vector (VAR)
suggests that a variation in Europe’s GDP growth has a significant impact on Morocco’s nonagricultural GDP.
One important question is why, in spite of these links, in the current period, the downturn in Morocco
was mild relative to the severe recession in Europe. First, data for one or two years does not
necessarily contradict long-term correlations. Second, the correlations, as well as the VAR analysis,
indicate the expected variation of
Morocco’s non-agricultural GDP growth
around its trend in response to
variations in the EU’s GDP growth.
Estimations from the authorities suggest
that Morocco’s total GDP growth trend
could be close to 5 percent. 1
1

The 2010 Budget Law estimates that after 2004 this
trend reached 4.8 percent. See: Rapports accompagnant
le projet de la Loi de Finances 2010 / Rapport
économique et financier (page 60)
http://www.finances.gov.ma/esp_doc/util/file.jsp?iddoc=
3147

19
Box 2. Contribution of the Public Enterprise Sector to the Economic Stimulus
The public enterprise sector plays a key role in the Moroccan economy. As of 2008, the
sector comprised 716 public enterprises, of which 460 were corporations with between 5 and
100 percent public ownership and 256 were public service providers including water, public
transport, and electricity.
In 2008, (i) they generated
about 12 percent of total
added value; (ii) their
investment expenditure
(9.6 percent of GDP) was
almost twice the capital
expenditure of the central
government (5.5 percent
of GDP), and (iii) they
employed 124.6 thousand
person (about 14 percent
of total public sector
employment) of which
39.5 thousand (about
4 percent of total public
sector employment) are employed by public corporations.
Public enterprises are expected to contribute significantly to the 2010 economic
stimulus. In 2009, planned investment by public enterprises increased by over 16 percent
and a further increase of 30 percent is
foreseen in the 2010 budget allocations.
These investment levels presume high
execution rates: the public enterprise sector
executed 91 percent of the investment
budget in 2008. The contribution of the
public enterprise sector to the stimulus in
2010 and beyond would thus depend on its
capacity to keep up these implementation
rates even with the significantly increased
investment budget.

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
MOROCCO
2009 Article IV Consultation
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
December 23, 2009

CONTENTS

PAGE

Annex I. Relations with the Fund ............................................................................................2
Annex II. Relations with the World Bank Group .....................................................................4
Annex III. Statistical Issues .......................................................................................................6

2
ANNEX I. MOROCCO: RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
As of November 30, 2009

I. Membership Status: Joined: April 25, 1958
II. General Resources Account:

Article VIII
SDR Million

% Quota

Quota

588.20

100.00

Fund holdings of currency

517.76

88.02

Reserve Position

70.45

11.98

SDR Million

% Allocation

Net cumulative allocation

561.42

100.00

Holdings

488.06

86.93

Holdings Exchange Rate
III. SDR Department:

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None
V. Latest Financial Arrangements:

Type
Stand-By
Stand-By
Stand-By

Date of
Arrangement
Jan 31, 1992
Jul 20, 1990
Aug 30, 1988

Expiration
Date
Mar 31, 1993
Mar 31, 1991
Dec 31, 1989

Amount Approved Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
(SDR Million)
91.98
18.40
100.00
48.00
210.00
210.00

VI. Projected Payments to Fund
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2010

Forthcoming
2011
2012

2013

0.22
0.22

0.22
0.22

0.22
0.22

0.22
0.22

3
VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement and Exchange System
Morocco maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments
and transfers on current international transactions. However, Morocco maintains certain
restrictions relating to Iraq and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),
pursuant to UN Security Council Resolutions. These are subject to notification to the Fund in
accordance with Decision 144 (52/51). The exchange rate is freely determined in the
interbank foreign exchange market, which was created in 1996. Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM)
intervenes in the market to maintain the exchange rate within its target range, defined around
a fixed central rate. Morocco has a conventional peg arrangement. The current exchange rate
of the Moroccan dirham is pegged to a basket of currencies comprising the euro and the
U.S. dollar, with respective weights of 80 and 20 percent. BAM fixes daily rates for the rated
currencies on the basis of variations on the value of the basket. Rates for most currencies
quoted in Morocco are established on the basis of the daily dirham-euro rate and the cross
rates for those currencies in relation to the euro in the international exchange markets. As of
December 10, 2009, the SDR/dirham exchange rate was SDR 1=MAD 12.29.
VIII. Article IV Consultation
Morocco is on the 12-month cycle. The last discussions of the Article IV consultation were
held in Rabat during May 19–30, 2008, and were concluded by the Executive Board on July
23, 2008.
IX. Technical Assistance
November 2007— World Bank-IMF—Financial System Stability Assessment—Update
December 10-20, 2007: STA—GFSM Pilot Study
June 24-July 7, 2008: STA—Improving Monetary and Finance Statistics, and Implementing
the Standardized Reporting Forms.
November 17-28, 2008: STA—Balance of Payments Statistics
2007-09: MCM—Peripatetic visits—Accounting, internal rating and bank supervision.
January 27 to February 2, 2009: MCM—Stress Testing and Macroprudential Analysis
April 19–30, 2009: STA—National Accounts Statistics
September 22-October 5, 2009: FAD—Recent Revenue Developments: Analysis and
Implications to Fiscal Policy
X. Resident Representative: None

4
ANNEX II. MOROCCO: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
JMAP Implementation, FY10
As of November 20, 2009
Title

Bank work
program in next
12 months

Products

Provisional
timing of
missions
A. Mutual Information on Relevant Work Programs

Expected
delivery date

Ongoing activities
with multiple missions
throughout the year

All are FY10
activities

2009 Article IV Consultation

November 2-13 2009

January 2010

Preparing analytical work on spillovers and
efficiency of investment

Ongoing

a. Country Partnership Strategy
b. Public Expenditure Review (PER) on
health and education, with the support of a
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA), completed, and a
Country Governance and Anticorruption
Strategy (CGAC), completed.
c. Procurement Review
d. Sector work on:
 Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of
subsidy removal
 Reviewing Social Protection
 Transport, Energy and Electricity
Transmission
 Gender and social inclusion
 Environment and Tourism
 Skills Development/Labor Market
 Climate change & mitigation Strategy
e. Development Policy Lending on: Financial
Sector, Public Admin. Reform IV,
Education Sector, Energy Development
Fund, Rural Roads Additional financing,
Oum Er Rbia Irrigation and Oum Er Riba
Sanitation.
f. Technical assistance on
 Port Trade Facilitation–Customs
 Public Sector reform
 Trade policy tools
 Pension Reform Follow-Up
 Business Climate

IMF work
program in next
12 months

5

Staff visit

March 2010

2010 Article IV consultation

November 2010

Technical assistance missions on:
MCM: Continued assistance on Basel II with
a focus on market and operational risks

March/April 2010

STA: Monetary and Financial Statistics

March 2010

January 2011

B. Requests for Work Program Inputs
Fund request to
Bank

Bank request to
Fund

Developments on the subsidy reform

As needed

Sectoral analysis

As needed

Assessment of macroeconomic stance and
prospects

Semiannual (and on
ad hoc basis if
requested)

Request for assessment letters to DPLs

At least 1 operation
predicted

Data sharing

Ongoing

C. Agreement on Joint Products and Missions
Joint products
in next 12
months

Continuous close coordination on the reform
agenda

Ongoing

Following Article
IV and staff visits

6
ANNEX III. MOROCCO: STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of December 1, 2009
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision is adequate to conduct effective surveillance.
National accounts: Real sector data are adequate for surveillance.
Government finance statistics: Fiscal data are adequate for surveillance.
Balance of payments statistics: External sector data are adequate for surveillance.
Monetary and financial statistics: They are adequate for surveillance, but the development of additional
indicators (regarding, for example, the debt of households and corporations) would be desirable.

II. Data Standards and Quality
Morocco is a SDDS subscriber since December 2005.

The results of a data ROSC mission were published in
April 2003 (Country Report No. 03/92).

TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF DECEMBER 1, 2009

Data7

Frequency
of
Reporting7

Frequency
of
publication7

12/01/09

D

D

D

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

Broad Money

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

Interest Rates2

11/30/09

12/01/09

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

10/30/09

11/20/09

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing3 – General Government4

2008

06/30/2009

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing3– Central Government

10/30/09

12/01/09

Stocks of Central Government and Central GovernmentGuaranteed Debt5

Q2, 2009

External Current Account Balance

Date of latest
observation

Date received

Exchange Rates

12/01/09

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of
the Monetary Authorities1

Frequency of

Memo items
Data Quality –
Methodological
soundness8

Data Quality –
Accuracy and
reliability9

LO, LO, O, O, LO

M

O, LO, O, O

LO, LO, O, O, O

A

A

LO, LNO, LO, O

O, O, O, O, LO

M

M

M

09/30/09

A

A

A

Q2, 2009

09/30/09

Q

Q

Q

LO, LO, LO, LO

LO, LO, O, LO, LNO

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

10/30/09

12/01/09

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Q2, 2009

09/30/09

Q

Q

Q

LO, LNO, LO, LO

LNO, LO, O, O, LNO

Q2, 2009

09/30/09

Q

Q

Q

2008

09/30/09

A

A

A

Gross External Debt
International Investment Position
1

6

7

LO, O, LNO, LO

Any reserve assets that are pledged of otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as well as
the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means.
2
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published on April 4, 2003, and based on the findings of the mission that took place during January 16–30, 2002, for the dataset corresponding to the
variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely
observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
9
Same as Footnote 8, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and
statistical outputs, and revision studies.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/19
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 16, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with
Morocco
On January, 25, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Morocco.1
Background
Morocco’s strong starting position, reflecting macroeconomic and structural reforms introduced
over the last decade, has given Morocco greater room for maneuver in its policy response. The
direct impact of the global crisis on Morocco has been limited, primarily affecting Morocco
through real channels. Exports, tourism receipts, remittances, and foreign direct investment
(FDI) have all declined this year, due primarily to the slowdown in Europe, although most recent
data suggest that some flows are gradually improving. In particular, Morocco has low public
debt and low inflation, and the financial system is sound, with little exposure to international
markets. In this setting, domestic demand has been resilient. Moreover, Morocco is benefitting
from an exceptional cereal harvest. As a result, overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth in
2009 is projected at around 5 percent.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
The authorities responded quickly to the unfolding crisis and have been successful in
maintaining confidence. In particular, the fiscal balance will shift from a small surplus in 2008 to
a deficit of about 2½ percent of GDP in 2009 as the authorities proceed with already-planned
fiscal reforms, a boost in public investment, and targeted support to key sectors. A drop in
revenue, partly due to already planned fiscal reforms, was offset to a degree by a fall in
subsidies due to lower world commodity prices. With inflationary pressures low, the central
bank—Bank Al-Maghrib—likewise lowered its key policy rate by 25 basis points, and, to boost
liquidity, gradually reduced reserve requirements from 15 to 8 percent in 2009. The stock
market remains well below its highs in early-2008, but the fall in 2009 has been moderate.
Continued sizable support from Morocco’s external partners has also served as a source of
resilience.
In the financial sector, the rapid credit growth in recent years is expected to lead to a moderate
increase in nonperforming loans (NPLs) and thus continued vigilance is needed. Credit growth
has averaged 23 percent per year over the 2006–08 period, slowing to about 12 percent growth
in 2009. At the same time, the share of NPLs to total loans has fallen sharply over the last five
years. The real estate sector, which in some cities has seen a correction after a run-up in recent
years, is a specific concern, although NPLs in the sector remain low and provisioning is high.
The authorities continue to take steps to improve monitoring of the financial sector, including
establishing a credit bureau, and planning to fully implement Basel II recommendations and
raise the capital adequacy ratio to 12 percent for certain banking institutions, based on their risk
profile.
The peg to the basket has served Morocco well. Staff analysis suggests that the exchange rate
is broadly in line with its fundamentals. Other indicators, such as current account developments
and movements in price-based indicators, point to a mild appreciation of the real exchange rate
in 2009.
The authorities are deepening structural reforms to increase productivity, boost growth and
improve social indicators, including reducing youth unemployment, which remains high. The
authorities continue liberalizing trade and simplifying the tax regime and plan to reform the
justice system, increase infrastructure investment, and strengthen support for industry, tourism,
and energy. In addition, the Plan Vert (“Green Plan”), which aims to increase productivity in the
agricultural sector, is moving ahead and more recently the government launched a similar effort
to expand the country's fishing sector. A number of reform efforts are underway in the education
and health sectors, the success of which will be a key element of improving living standards and
boosting Morocco’s potential growth while reducing unemployment.
The authorities plan to continue publishing all documents relating to the Article IV consultation.

3
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that Morocco faced the global crisis from a strong position,
reflecting in large part the range of macroeconomic and structural reforms introduced over the
last decade, and was well-positioned to respond to and weather the crisis. Directors also noted
that Morocco’s financial system is sound, with limited exposure to international capital markets.
Thus, the direct impact of the global crisis on Morocco has been mild, with the economy being
affected mainly through real channels as a result of the slowdown in Europe.
Directors commended the authorities’ response to the worsened global outlook. A moderate
loosening of fiscal and monetary policies, coupled with vigilant financial sector supervision, has
supported confidence and domestic demand, while containing risks. These policies, together
with an exceptional cereal crop, contributed to strong real GDP growth in 2009.
Directors stressed that the challenge for 2010 will be to continue efforts to sustain economic
activity in the face of a weak external environment. They supported the authorities’ plan for a
further temporary widening of the fiscal deficit, with spending increases focused appropriately
on capital rather than current spending.
Directors stressed that maintaining macroeconomic stability through sound fiscal policy—a
notable achievement of recent years—will remain critical. They welcomed the authorities’
commitment to return to fiscal consolidation, which will be phased in gradually starting in 2011.
This will be important to stabilize the public debt-to-GDP ratio, preserve low borrowing costs in
the economy, and facilitate the implementation of monetary policy. Replacing the universal
subsidy system gradually with a system targeting vulnerable populations would improve
efficiency and reduce fiscal risks.
Directors noted that the strong bank credit growth of recent years has moderated. However,
they cautioned that, after a sharp fall in recent years, nonperforming loans are likely to pick up
somewhat given the economic slowdown. The authorities should remain vigilant and continue to
pay close attention to the capital requirements of the banking system. Directors also welcomed
the continuing implementation of Basel II.
Directors agreed that the current pegged exchange rate regime has served Morocco well. Many
Directors considered that the authorities’ medium-term objective to move to a more flexible
monetary and exchange rate regime could help the economy to adapt better to changes in the
international environment. They considered that prerequisites for a move to inflation targeting
are largely in place; the risk of imported inflation is now much less; and balance sheets in the
economy have little exposure to exchange rate movements. However, many other Directors
considered that the timing of a move to a more flexible monetary and exchange rate policy
should be carefully assessed, and they supported the authorities’ caution in this regard.

4
Directors stressed that continued structural reforms remain critical to boost growth, enhance
competitiveness, and help improve Morocco’s social indicators. The authorities should push
forward with the ongoing and planned reforms, including improving the efficiency and
composition of public spending and further simplifying the tax and trade regimes. Directors
welcomed the envisaged structural reforms to increase productivity by improving the business
environment and raising capital investment. Strengthening social services will be critical to
reducing poverty and addressing the persistent problem of youth unemployment.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5
Morocco: Selected Economic Indicators, 2004–10
2004 2005

2006

2007

Prel.
2008

Staff Proj.
2009 2010

(Annual percentage change)
Output and Prices
Real GDP (market price)
Real nonagricultural GDP (market price)
Consumer prices (end of period)
Consumer prices (period average)

4.8
4.9
0.5
1.5

3.0
5.8
2.1
1.0

7.8
5.5
3.3
3.3

2.7
7.1
2.0
2.0

5.6
4.0
4.2
3.9

5.0
2.3
1.8
1.8

3.2
4.0
2.2
2.2

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and Saving
Gross capital formation
Of which: Nongovernment
Gross national savings
Of which: Nongovernment

29.1

28.8

29.4

32.5

36.3

34.3

35.0

26.4

26.3

26.5

29.2

33.2

30.8

31.2

30.8

30.6

31.6

32.4

31.1

29.9

30.5

29.3

30.8

27.5

25.7

24.2

24.8

26.5

(In percent of GDP)
Public Finances
Revenue (including grants)

22.6

24.3

25.7

27.9

31.0

26.0

24.6

Expenditure
Budget balance (commitment basis, including Hassan II Fund and
grants)

27.0

30.3

28.0

29.1

31.1

28.9

29.3

-4.5

-6.0

-1.9

0.4

1.6

-2.3

-4.4

Primary balance (including grants)

-1.0

-2.7

1.4

3.5

4.2

0.2

-1.8

Total government debt

59.4

63.1

58.1

53.5

47.3

47.4

48.0

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Monetary Sector
Credit to the private sector 1/
Broad money
Velocity of broad money
Three-month treasury bill rate (period average, in percent)

7.2

13.1

17.0

29.1

23.4

12.0

10.0

7.7
1.2
2.4

14.0
1.1
2.5

17.2
1.1
2.6

16.1
1.0
3.6

10.9
1.0
3.5

8.0
1.0
...

8.0
1.0
...

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
External Sector
Exports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change)

13.1

7.9

11.4

26.9

32.8

-35.0

7.4

Imports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change)

25.2

15.3

14.6

34.8

35.5

-26.5

9.1

-11.4

-13.8

-14.8

-18.7

-21.9

Current account excluding official transfers

1.5

1.4

1.8

-0.5

-6.5

-4.9

-4.7

Current account including official transfers

1.7

1.8

2.2

-0.1

-5.2

-4.4

-4.4

Merchandise trade balance

Foreign direct investment

-17.8 -18.3

1.5

2.7

3.1

2.9

2.3

0.8

2.5

Total external debt

29.1

24.2

23.9

23.7

20.6

23.0

24.5

Gross reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) 2/

16.3

16.1

20.2

24.0

22.0

21.9

22.5

6.9

6.7

In months of next year imports of goods and services

8.6

7.4

7.0

6.2

7.5

In percent of short-term external debt (on remaining

776

912

1,002

1,310

1,760

Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)

56.9

59.5

65.6

75.2

88.9

89.9

96.8

Unemployment rate (in percent)
Net imports of energy products (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Local currency per U.S. dollar (period average)

10.8
-3.0
8.9

11.1
-4.5
8.9

9.7
-5.1
8.8

9.8
-6.4
8.2

9.6
-9.2
7.8

...
-5.6
...

...
-7.1
...

-1.2

-1.7

1.2

-0.4

1.1

...

...

1,570 1,618

maturity basis)
Memorandum Items:

Real effective exchange rate (annual average,
percentage change)
Sources: Moroccan authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes credit to public enterprises.
2/ As of 2009, reserves include the new SDR allocation.

1
Statement by Mohammed Daïri
Alternate Executive Director for Morocco
January 25, 2010
At the outset, I wish to convey the Moroccan authorities’ appreciation to staff for the fruitful
exchange of views, the high quality assessment of recent economic developments and policies, which
they broadly share, and the innovative presentation in the excellent staff report. They highly
appreciate the close relationship with the Fund, and are grateful to management and the Executive
Board for their support and advice.
Impact of the global crisis and policy response
The Moroccan economy has weathered relatively well the impact of the global crisis. Limited
integration to the international capital markets, with virtually no exposure to toxic assets and very
low level of foreign indebtedness of the financial, corporate, and the household sectors, has
significantly reduced the spillovers from the global financial crisis. However, given Morocco’s
relatively open economy and its close ties to the EU, the deep and prolonged recession in this region
was bound to have negative spillover effects on the Moroccan economy, affecting in particular
exports, tourism receipts, worker remittances, and FDI.
Despite this exogenous shock, Morocco’s economic performance was remarkably strong in 2009,
reflecting the economy’s strong fundamentals and resilience—including from the buffers built in
recent years—an exceptionally good cereal crop, and the authorities’ prompt and appropriate policy
response. Real GDP growth is estimated at 5 percent, with the nonagricultural sector growing by
about 2 ½ percent, down from 4 percent in 2008; inflation fell to 1 percent; the current account
deficit has declined; international reserves remained at a comfortable level; and the financial sector
was resilient. Recent provisional data indicate that fiscal and external positions in 2009 will be better
than estimated at the time of the Article IV discussions.
As outlined by staff and highlighted in previous consultation reports, the Moroccan economy has
gained flexibility and resilience to exogenous shocks owing to several years of prudent
macroeconomic policies and sustained implementation of structural reforms. Over the past five years,
growth was higher on average than in previous periods, more broad-based, and less sensitive to
volatile agricultural output. Significant advances in fiscal consolidation, including from strong
revenue performance and expenditure restraint, created space to absorb the food and fuel price shocks
in 2007-08 and face the global economic slowdown, while channeling increased resources to
spending on social sectors and infrastructure. Monetary policy has gained increased credibility in
maintaining inflation at very low levels, while helping achieve broad stability of the real exchange
rate. Furthermore, Morocco’s strong and well-supervised financial system has provided an important
element of resiliency and confidence. Key challenges remain, however, including further raising
growth performance, addressing the severe youth unemployment, and achieving faster reduction in
poverty and improvement in living standards.

2
The authorities’ policy response in dealing with the external shock has been prompt and well
calibrated. The 2009 Budget included a number of measures aimed at providing support to the
economy through a significant increase in public investment, a limited wage increase, and a reduction
in personal income tax rates—as agreed with social partners—and other measures targeted at SMEs
and exports. In early 2009, the Government set a high level joint public/private sector committee
(Comité de Veille Stratégique), tasked with monitoring domestic and international developments,
sharing information among participants, and agreeing on the necessary measures to assist sectors and
enterprises most affected by the crisis. In this context, a number of enterprises benefited from
temporary support to protect employment through job training and reduction in social security
contributions, as well as from programs aimed at facilitating consolidation and restructuring. Efforts
were also made toward attracting investment by Moroccans residing abroad and helping exporting
companies in accessing new markets.
Soon after the onset of the global financial crisis, Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM) moved swiftly to
strengthen monitoring of banks’ exposure and potential risks. BAM has also provided liquidity to
ease tensions in the interbank money market. In response to lower inflation, BAM lowered its key
policy rate and reduced the reserve requirements in three steps from 15 to 8 percent to help provide
adequate financing to support economic activity. In this regard, even though credit growth moderated
as a result of weaker nonagricultural sector activity, it remained at a healthy level. Moreover, the
share of nonperforming loans (NPLs) has continued to decline, falling to 5.5 percent at end-2009,
partly reflecting write-offs of fully provisioned loans, while the rate of provisioning has continued to
increase, reaching 74 percent. BAM remains vigilant to preclude a potential resurgence of NPLs.
While the financial sector remained largely insulated from the fallout of the crisis, the authorities
strengthened macro-prudential supervision, based on stress tests, to stem potential risks emanating
from second-round effects. BAM has also made significant progress in implementing Basle II
recommendations. It raised the capital adequacy ratio requirement to 10 percent of risk-weighted
assets at end-2008, and is contemplating raising it further for some banks on the basis of their risk
profile, while avoiding pro-cyclicality.
Similarly, fiscal policy shifted to provide a measured support to the economy. After recording a
surplus in 2008, reflecting strong revenue performance, partly due to one-off measures, the fiscal
position is projected to turn to a deficit of about 2 percent of GDP in 2009, including the effect of a
small fiscal stimulus estimated at some 1 ½ percent of GDP. Revenues are expected to decline by
over 2 percentage points of GDP in response to lower nonagricultural sector activity, and as a result
of the scheduled tax rate cuts and the one-off revenue gains achieved in 2008. Government spending
has risen following implementation of the wage increase agreed with social partners in 2008, and as a
result of higher investment expenditure in support of economic activity. The increase, however, has
been partly offset by the decline in food and oil subsidies resulting from lower international prices.
The limited loosening of fiscal policy in 2009 has not derailed the fiscal consolidation path, and
public debt, which declined by 12 percentage points of GDP during 2005-08, remained unchanged at
about 47 percent of GDP.

3
Near-and medium-term outlook and policies
GDP growth is projected to moderate to 3 ¼ percent in 2010, based on the return of agricultural
production to its normal trend, which would more than offset higher nonagricultural sector activity,
and to increase to about 5 percent over the medium term. The authorities consider, and staff agrees,
that withdrawing the monetary and fiscal stimulus at this stage would not be appropriate. In this
context, the 2010 budget includes a further moderate increase in investment spending, together with
the implementation of the second phase of the scheduled tax rate cuts. This would bring the fiscal
deficit close to 4 ½ percent of GDP. Although the public debt-to-GDP ratio is slated to remain
virtually unchanged in 2010, the authorities are firmly committed to resuming fiscal consolidation,
starting from 2011, with the objective of stabilizing the fiscal deficit at around 3 percent of GDP and
the debt-to-GDP ratio at less than 50 percent over the medium term. In this regard, the authorities
intend to continue strengthening the tax system through simplification, broadening of the base, and
reducing exemptions; to improve budget control and monitoring; and to reduce budget rigidities and
enhance expenditure efficiency, including by replacing the universal subsidy system with a welltargeted safety net and reforming the civil service, with World Bank assistance. The authorities are
grateful to Fiscal Affairs Department’s staff for the excellent TA report on tax revenue developments
and policies.
BAM will continue to monitor closely credit developments and bank liquidity in light of growth and
inflation prospects. In its December 22 meeting, BAM’s Board decided to maintain its key policy rate
unchanged, based on its assessment of declining inflationary risks and an inflation outlook that is
consistent with the objective of price stability. BAM will continue to provide support to economic
activity in 2010, while standing ready to address potential inflationary concerns.
The authorities attach high importance to maintaining a sustainable external position. They share
staff’s view that the peg of the dirham to a basket of currencies has served the economy well. It is
noteworthy that, unlike other countries with a pegged exchange rate, the system has not led to a
build-up of risks in the financial, corporate, or household sectors in Morocco, as staff underscores,
possibly reflecting a mitigating effect of remaining capital controls, although not all the possibilities
offered by recent liberalization measures are being used. Moreover, the exchange rate is broadly in
line with fundamentals. While the authorities see with some concern the recent deterioration in the
trade balance and the current account, they consider that part of the deterioration is of a temporary
nature, reflecting the weak activity and employment levels worldwide, and in Europe in particular, as
well as the large, and potentially reversible, currency depreciations in many competitor countries.
This being said, the authorities will continue to monitor external developments closely, and will rely
primarily on structural reforms to achieve lasting improvements in competitiveness.
The authorities welcome the staff’s favorable assessment of the progress made in preparing for a
possible move to greater exchange rate flexibility and adoption of inflation targeting. The
strengthening of central bank’s independence and of its analytical capabilities and operational
framework, and the improvement in the fiscal position and financial sector soundness and

4
supervision are important achievements that would enhance efficiency of monetary policy under any
framework. MCM Department’s continued assistance to BAM in this and other areas is appreciated.
However, the authorities believe that further progress is needed in understanding inflation dynamics,
including at the sector level, as well as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy; increasing
budget flexibility to enhance the scope for countercyclical policies; and deepening the capital and
foreign exchange markets. Potential risks associated with greater exchange rate flexibility should also
be reduced through a well-designed intervention strategy and strengthening of banks’ and the
business sector’s capacity to manage exchange rate risks, including through appropriate hedging
instruments. Under the circumstances, and pending completion of all prerequisites, including
adequate sequencing with prudent capital account liberalization, the authorities view the adoption of
inflation targeting and greater exchange rate flexibility as a medium-term objective.
The authorities continue to implement their structural reform agenda aimed at enhancing productivity
and competitiveness, improving the business environment, for which a high level monitoring
committee has been established with assistance from the World Bank, and diversifying the sources of
growth. Key reforms underway relate to education, health, and the judiciary, in addition to several
sector strategies elaborated in association with the private sector aimed at increasing investment,
production, exports, and employment in areas where Morocco has a comparative advantage. These
and other initiatives targeted at the vulnerable and under-privileged income groups, including the
“Initiative Nationale du Développement Humain”, should help Morocco sustain higher levels of
growth and employment, improve social indicators, and raise the standards of living of the
population.
The authorities are cognizant of the risks to the economy from delayed world recovery. However,
they are confident that their objectives in terms of growth, inflation, and the fiscal and external
positions are well within reach. They are moving ahead with their ambitious reform program, which
should put the economy in a better position to benefit from the post-crisis global environment and lay
the foundations for lasting improvement in its medium-term prospects.

