May 2012
IMF Country Report No. 12/113

© 2012 International Monetary Fund

April 19, 2012
March 6, 2012

May 4, 2012
2012

Republic of Belarus: 2012 Article IV Consultation and Second Post-Program
Monitoring Discussions—Staff Report; Informational Annex; and Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2012 Article IV consultation with Belarus, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2012 Article IV consultation and Second Post-Program Monitoring
Discussions, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
March 6, 2012, with the officials of Belarus on economic developments and policies. Based
on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
April 18, 2012. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



Informational Annex updating information on recent developments.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its May 4, 2012 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Staff Report for the 2012 Article IV Consultation and Second Post-Program
Monitoring Discussions
Prepared by the European Department in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by Aasim Husain and Vivek Arora
April 18, 2012
Key Issues
An incomplete macroeconomic stabilization. The economy has been emerging from the 2011 crisis.
The authorities unified the exchange rate and introduced a flexible exchange rate regime in October 2011.
Since mid-2011 they have also pursued fiscal and income restraint and tightened monetary policy. These
policies have restored FX markets, reduced inflation and the current account deficit, and led to an
increase in reserves. However, this stability is tentative as some elements of the current macroeconomic
framework are inconsistent with the objective of medium-term stability.
Consolidating stability. The short-term priority is to adopt a consistent macroeconomic framework
focused on domestic and external stability. Attempts to quickly restore wages to their pre-crisis level
should be resisted. Over the medium-term, fiscal policy should focus on stabilizing debt and rationalizing
government spending. Making progress towards an inflation targeting framework would boost the
credibility of monetary and exchange rate policies.
Achieving sustainable growth. State interference in the economy has weakened growth prospects. Price
liberalization, privatization and an enterprise reform would improve efficiency of resource allocation and
productivity growth. Prices should be market-determined and administrative price regulation should be
phased out. Privatization should be transparent and reflect best practices, and state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) should operate on commercial terms.
Financial sector reform. The financial sector—dominated by state-owned banks (SOBs)—is small and
inefficient. A greater role of private banks would improve its efficiency. The Development Bank should
relieve SOBs from lending under government programs (LGP) and become the sole provider of LGP,
with its new LGP reported above the line in the budget. SOBs’ governance should be strengthened to
attract private investors.
Risks. The resumption of expansionary policies to achieve high growth and wage targets could re-ignite
inflation and call into question medium-term viability and capacity to service external debt. A possible
escalation of the euro area crisis could affect Belarus, primarily via a spillover from Russia if oil prices
collapsed. On the upside, strong commodity prices could boost economic activity in Russia and
strengthen demand for Belarus’ goods and services.

2
Contents

Page

I. Context....................................................................................................................................4
II. Near Term Policies: Rebuilding Confidence and Restoring Stability...................................4
A. Stabilization After the 2011 Crisis: Are We There Yet? ..........................................4
B. The Paradox of Fiscal Policy: Low Deficits, Rapidly Rising Debt ........................13
III. The Medium-Term Agenda: Maintaining Stability and Securing Sustainable Growth ....15
A. Medium-Term Policies to Maintain Stability .........................................................15
B. Can the Current Model Produce Sustainable Growth? ...........................................16
C. Can the Financial System Support Sustainable Growth? ........................................19
IV. Capacity to Repay and Relationship with the Fund...........................................................20
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................21
Boxes
1. The 2011 Crisis ....................................................................................................................5
2. Real Effective Exchange Rate Assessment..........................................................................6
3. Banking Sector Risks ...........................................................................................................9
4. Wage and Productivity Developments...............................................................................17
Figures
1. Real Sector Developments, 2008–12 .................................................................................23
2. Inflation Developments, 2009–12 ......................................................................................24
3. External Developments, 2010–12 ......................................................................................25
4. Monetary Developments, 2010–12 ....................................................................................26
5. Performance Among Peers, 2002–11 ................................................................................27
6. EBRD Transition Indicators, 2010 ....................................................................................28
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 ...........................................29
2. Balance of Payments (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 .........................................................30
3. Fiscal Indicators and Projections (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 .......................................32
4. Monetary Authorities’ Accounts (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 .......................................35
5. Monetary Survey (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 ...............................................................36
6. Selected Economic Indicators (Adjustment Scenario), 2008–17 ......................................37
7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2007–11 ..................................................................38
8. Capacity to Repay the Fund (Baseline Scenario), 2009–17 ..............................................39
Appendix I:Tables
1. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007–17 ...........................................................40
2. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007–17 ...................................................42

3
Appendix I: Figures
1 External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of the Baseline Scenario ................................41
2. Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of the Baseline Scenario ...................................43
Appendix II
Risk Assessment Matrix ..........................................................................................................44

4
I. CONTEXT
1.
Belarus has endured two crises in four years. The 2008–09 economic crisis was
precipitated by the global financial crisis, which had led to the loss of external financing, a
sharp decline in exports, and exacerbated by an already high current account deficit and low
reserves. The 2011 economic crisis was self-inflicted, caused by the reversal of macrostabilization policies implemented under the 2009–10 SBA. Expansionary credit and wage
policies widened the current account deficit, while attempts to maintain the fixed exchange
rate created pressures on official reserves and eventually led to the loss of control of the
exchange rate and a sharp acceleration of inflation.
2.
Belarus has now used up most of its safety margins. External debt has more than
doubled since 2008, reaching 61.4 percent of GDP in 2011, as current account deficits were
financed by external borrowing and the sale of state-owned assets. Public confidence in the
authorities’ policies and in the rubel was eroded during the two crises. Belarus has become
more dependent on Russia’s financial support in the form of low priced oil and gas imports,
new loans, and purchase of Belarus’ assets. A crackdown on the opposition after the 2010
presidential elections led the EU and the U.S. to curtail official interactions with the
authorities and tighten sanctions on individuals and companies, although the tightened
sanctions are not expected to affect the economy significantly.
II. NEAR TERM POLICIES: REBUILDING CONFIDENCE AND RESTORING STABILITY
A. Stabilization After the 2011 Crisis: Are We There Yet?
3.
The last year was marked by a severe balance of payments crisis. Loose policies
pursued after the end of 2009 Fund-supported program pushed the economy into an
inflation-depreciation spiral. Expansionary wage and credit policies in 2010 and early 2011
widened the current account deficit, created pressures on reserves and eventually led to the
loss of control of the exchange rate, sharply accelerating inflation and a contraction of
economic activity in Q3 2011 (Box 1 elaborates on the crisis in more detail).
4.
In response to the crisis, and consistent with Fund advice, the authorities
adjusted policies in the second half of the year. The NBRB discontinued non-standard
liquidity support to banks from June 2011; it also restrained the provision of standard
liquidity support and raised policy interest rates substantially later in the year. These policy
changes were consistent with Fund recommendations and led to a much needed slowdown in
credit growth. Following staff advice during the first Post-Program Monitoring discussions,
the authorities unified the exchange rate in October 2011. This allowed the FX market to
resume functioning, and the shift towards a flexible exchange rate system allowed the
realignment of the real effective exchange rate with fundamentals (Box 2). Expenditure
restraint allowed the budget to finish the year with a fiscal surplus of 3.1 percent of GDP.
For 2012, the authorities committed to a tight limit on financing of lending under government
programs (LGP) and to run a balanced budget.

5

Box 1. The 2011 Crisis
After the 2009 SBA expired, the authorities loosened policies considerably, which led to a
foreign exchange crisis in 2011. Heightened domestic demand resulting from expansionary wage
and credit policies, as well as an overvalued real effective exchange rate, resulted in a loss of
competitiveness and contributed to an expansion of the current account deficit in 2010. Facing
strong demand for FX from households and enterprises, the NBRB intervened heavily to support
the exchange rate. By the end of Q1 2011, gross reserves had fallen to around 3½ billion US dollars
(less than one month of imports).
A collapse in the rubel led to a surge in inflation. After unsuccessful attempts to solve the
unfolding foreign exchange crisis with administrative measures, the NBRB stopped intervening on
the FX market in March 2011. As the authorities were not prepared to float the rubel, FX shortages
led to the collapse of trade in the markets and the development of the parallel market. The NBRB
devalued the official exchange rate from about 3000 to 5000 rubels per US dollar, but the move was
largely irrelevant, as they did not have sufficient reserves for intervention. The parallel exchange
rate depreciated further to about 9000 rubels per US dollar. Pass-through effects led to an
acceleration of inflation to over 100 percent in late 2011.
The authorities took measures to stabilize the economy in the second half of 2011. The NBRB
stopped providing liquidity at below market terms from June 2011 and gradually increased its
policy rates increasing the rate of refinancing from 18 to 45 percent, and the overnight rate from
22 to 70 percent in the second half of the year. The NBRB unified the exchange rates on October 20
and switched to a flexible exchange rate regime with limited intervention. In addition, the
authorities pursued tight budget policy. These measures helped to stabilize the exchange rate by the
end of the year, and monthly inflation started to subside in December 2011.
The authorities have made progress in establishing stability, however, risks remain. In the first
two months of 2012, consumer prices have increased only by 3.5 percent and the rubel has
appreciated. Foreign exchange reserves have increased to more than 8 billion dollars, and the
underlying net reserve position has improved accordingly. However, in the aftermath of the crisis
inflation and devaluation expectations remain volatile, and the risk of resumed pressure on the
exchange rate and reserves remains substantial if policies underlying stability change.

6
Box 2. Real Effective Exchange Rate Assessment
Indicators suggest that exchange rate unification in October 2011 corrected the misalignment and
as of Q1 2012 the real effective exchange rate (REER) was broadly in line with fundamentals. The
macro balance approach does not suggest misalignment as the underlying current account deficit—as
suggested by the medium-term baseline current account balance corrected for a projected change in the
REER—falls within the range of the estimated current account norms. At the same time, the external
sustainability (ES) approach suggests that a somewhat larger current account deficit would be
consistent with sustaining the end-2011 net external asset position (NEAP) of 52 percent of GDP. It
should be noted, however, that ES approach does not necessarily suggest undervaluation as it would be
prudent to stabilize the NEAP at a safer level.
Results from the Macroeconomic Balance Approach
CA norm Underlying CA
(percent of
(percent of
GDP)
GDP)

Gap

REER
elasticity

REER
Misalignment

-0.38
-0.38

1.7
-3.6

REER as of Q1 2012
I. CGER pooled estimation model
II. CGER hybrid pooled estimation model 1/

-2.2
-4.2

I. CGER Pooled estimation model
II. CGER hybrid poolded estimation model 1/

-2.2
-4.2

-2.8
-2.8

-0.7
1.4

Baseline REER expected to prevail by the end of 2012
-6.0
-6.0

-3.8
-1.8

-0.38
-0.38

10.1
4.8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
1/ CGER hybrid pooled estimation model is based on a CGER regression that includes a lagged current account balance instead
of the initial NEAP position (IMF Occasional Paper 261).

Results from the External Sustainability Approach
NEAP
Real growth
(percent of
(percent,
GDP)
2017)

Stabilizing the current level of NEAP 1/
No adjustment of the underlying CA

-52
-28

5.0
5.0

Inflation
(percent,
2017)

6.0
6.0

NEAPstabilizing
CAB
(percent of
GDP)

-5.3
-2.8

Underlying
CAB
(percent of
GDP)

-2.8
-2.8

Gap
(percent of
GDP)

2.4
0.0

REER
elasticity

-0.38
-0.38

Misalign.
(percent)

-6.4
0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
1/ NEAP at the end-2011.

At the same time, the loosening of policies projected in the baseline scenario would reintroduce
misalignment by the end of 2012. In the baseline
scenario the REER would appreciate during the
remainder of 2012 due to projected inflation being
higher than projected depreciation. This is likely to
increase the underlying current account deficit to
6 percent of GDP and reintroduce misalignment of
5–10 percent by the end of the year. In contrast, the
sharp reduction in inflation targeted in the
adjustment scenario and the absence of foreign
exchange intervention would limit REER
appreciation, maintain competitiveness and support
current account adjustment.
While these approaches provide a quantitative
assessment of exchange rate’s misalignment, they should be interpreted with caution. Uncertainty
about the effectiveness of exchange rate adjustment is particularly high in an economy with strong
features of central planning. Belarus’ economy is characterized by significant state control (70 percent
of total economy is controlled by the state) and rigidities that dampen the role of price signals
(administrative interference with price formation, quantitative targets and soft budget constraints arising
from the active role of the state in the financial sector), relative to a market based economy.

7
5.
In addition, Belarus secured a significant improvement in terms of trade
for 2012 and boosted its reserves in late 2011. The agreement with Russia signed in
November 2011 provided a substantial discount on the price of gas, 1 reducing the price by
nearly a half from the level paid in Q4 2011 (at the last year’s gas import volumes, the
reduction in price is equivalent to about 5 percent of GDP), and the authorities also secured
an improvement in the terms of importing Russian oil. Official reserves rose to $7.9 billion
due to privatization proceeds from the sale of a 50 percent of stake of Beltransgas
($2.5 billion), two tranches of the EurAsEC’s Anti-Crisis Fund (ACF) loan ($1.24 billion) 2
and a $1 billion loan from Sberbank.

6.
The improvement in policies paid off by bringing initial macroeconomic
stabilization (Figures 1–4). Monthly inflation rates fell sharply from an average 9.7 percent
in August-November to less than 2 percent in December-March. Households and corporates
sold dollars and increased their rubel deposits in banks, suggesting that inflation and
depreciation expectations are subsiding. In order to avoid appreciation of the rubel, the
NBBR intervened by purchasing FX in the market. Initial 2012 data suggest ongoing
improvement in the external trade balance.

1
2

The gas agreement covers the period from 2012 to 2014.

A $3 billion loan for balance of payments support was approved by the ACF in June 2011. The balance of the
loan will be disbursed in four equal disbursements of $440 million in 2012 and 2013. The loan has a 10-year
maturity, including a three-year grace period, and was extended at a variable interest rate referenced to the cost
of sovereign borrowing by Russia and Kazakhstan. The major elements of the policy package required by the
ACF included raising interest rates to positive levels in real terms, exchange rate unification; fiscal discipline;
the reduction of LGP to 4 percent of GDP in 2011, 3 percent of GDP in 2012 and 1 percent of GDP in 2013;
and privatization generating $2.5 billion in proceeds a year from 2011 to 2013.

8

Outlook and Risks
7.
However, these early successes may be undermined by inconsistencies in the
macroeconomic framework. In staff’s view, the ambitious GDP growth target of
5-5.5 percent set by the authorities for this year is not consistent with the objective to reduce
inflation to 20 percent this year. Moreover, the expected growth of real wages of 4 percent as
well as statements by high level officials that the average wage would reach $500 per month
by mid-2013 signal a possibility of loosening domestic demand policies. After raising the
refinancing rate and the NBRB overnight rate by 27 and 48 percentage points respectively in
the second half of 2011, the NBRB is under pressure to bring down interest rates. The NBRB
has already begun the process by reducing the refinancing rate by 7 percentage points in the
first quarter and 2 percentage points so far in the second quarter. The baseline scenario set
out in Tables 1-5 assumes that policies would remain tight for now, but relaxed later in the
year when it becomes apparent that economic activity and wages underperform relative to the
targets. 3 Attempts to pursue incompatible objectives would result in higher-than-planned
inflation and lower-than-planned growth. The baseline scenario assumes that scheduled debt
repayments would be financed by drawing down reserves leading to both a reduction of the
debt-to-GDP ratio and a much lower level of reserves over the medium term. 4
8.
Downside risks to the baseline scenario are significant: the risk assessment
matrix (Appendix II) provides a summary.
3

The baseline scenario assumes a relaxation of monetary policy (a reduction of policy interest rates leading to
an acceleration of non-LGP credit), higher-than-planned bank LGPs, and continued growth of budget sector and
SOE wages.

4

This approach differs from the one used on earlier staff reports, which assumed that external financing gaps
were filled by external borrowing (for example, see 2011 staff report on the first Post-Program Monitoring
discussions).

9
•

The most significant risk is a possibility of relaxation of domestic demand
policies in an attempt to pursue the growth target. Stimulating domestic demand
would re-ignite the inflation-depreciation spiral and erode external competitiveness.
Attempts to contain inflation and depreciation by price controls or large-scale
intervention would deepen distortions and deplete reserves. The macroeconomic
uncertainty increases financial sector risks: it puts pressure on banks’ capital and
leaves them exposed to sudden changes in depositors’ sentiment (Box 3 elaborates on
banking sector risks in more detail).
Box 3. Banking Sector Risks
Belarusian banks have weathered the 2011 crisis and their capital has been replenished. All
banks managed to continue their operations throughout the year even given a practical freeze of
the FX markets for half of 2011. As a consequence of worsening environment and dramatic
exchange rate devaluation, the banking system capital adequacy ratio (CAR) dropped
from 20.5 percent at the beginning of the year to 14.9 percent at end-November. Recapitalization
of SOBs in amount of 14.5 trillion rubels (5 percent of GDP) helped to increase the system CAR
to 24.7 percent at end-2011 by local standards. Banks continued to repay their foreign obligations
which stood at around $6 billion at end-2011 (half of which were short term). Russian bank
subsidiaries who represent major foreign banks in the country have received capital injections and
support pledges from their parent banks. Direct exposure to euro area banks is limited.
Deposits have been growing, but non-performing loans (NPLs) are also on the rise. Deposits
have stabilized and resumed growth since October at most banks; however, the competition for
funds among banks has led to erosion of interest margins as average rates on new deposits match
or exceed those on new loans. System-wide NPLs increased modestly to 4.2 percent at end-2011,
but this increase may not capture all underlying vulnerabilities in loan portfolios due to likely
lagged effects from the real economy; NPLs could be also underestimated due to loan
restructuring, in particular at SOBs. As an indication of credit quality worsening, loans in the
“watch” category that are one notch from being included in NPLs increased from 3.6 percent of
total loans at end-2010 to 10.6 percent at end-2011. Due to high interest rates in rubels, FX loans
to corporates increased by five percent in the first two months of 2012; NBRB is introducing a
special provision for loans to borrowers without FX income from July 1, 2012. The risk on
corporate FX loans is limited as they primarily were given to exporters. The stock of FX loans to
households is low due to the ban introduced since 2009.
The main risks for banks come from the domestic economy slowing down and potential
spillovers from the crisis in Europe. As the economy slows, NPLs are expected to increase
which would put pressure on banks’ capital and could call for new recapitalizations. External
factors could hurt Belarusian banks primarily via lower demand for goods by exporters, decreased
trade and project financing from European banks, and reduced support to their domestic
subsidiaries from Russian parent banks. Besides, banks hold significant FX claims on the NBRB
largely via deposit exchanges, which could put pressure on reserves in case of substantial FX
deposit withdrawals.

10
Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector
2010
Dec.

2011
Sep.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Capital adequacy
Capital adequacy ratio
Tier I capital adequacy ratio
Capital to assets
Foreign exchange loans to total loans 1/

20.5
14.9
13.7
21.7

16.5
11.9
10.2
29.8

14.3
9.9
8.4
39.5

14.9
10.3
8.6
39.0

24.7
18.8
14.1
39.5

Non-performing loans to gross loans
Watch loans
Provisions to total non-performing loans

3.5
3.6
61.9

4.2
8.4
72.2

4.3
8.7
72.2

4.4
10.2
75.1

4.2
10.6
79.0

Source: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus.
1/ The change in the ratio is due primarily to valuation effects.

•

On the external side, an escalation of the euro area crisis would pose significant
risks, although the extent of the shock would depend on the impact on Russia.
An economic slowdown in Belarus’ trading partners would reduce demand for
Belarus’ exports and an increase in global risk aversion could trigger a reduction in
the rollover rates of the external borrowing. Given strong ties with Russia, both trade
and financial transmission channels would depend on the extent to which the Russian
economy is affected by the crisis—strong commodity prices could dampen the effects
of a possible euro area crisis on the Russian economy and therefore reduce spillover
effects on Belarus.

•

Gas prices may not stay low forever. The recent gains in the terms of trade obtained
on account of the new gas contract with Gazprom could disappear over the medium
term if Russia decides to increase the domestic gas price to which the contract with
Belarus is linked.

Staff Recommendations
9.
In order to achieve external and domestic stability, macroeconomic framework
and policies should be made consistent with the inflation objective. Reducing the
emphasis on achieving high GDP growth and avoiding setting targets for wages in dollar
terms would boost confidence that strong policies will continue. Pursuing tight policies
would keep a lid on inflation and therefore preserve competitiveness gains obtained through
devaluation. A reduction of the trade deficit—as well as better prospects for the financial
account—would allow an increase in reserves to more than 3 months of imports in the
medium term (Table 6).

11
Belarus: Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios, 2011–17
GDP Growth (Year-on-year percent change)
Baseline scenario

7

7

Adjustment scenario

4

4

1

Domestic Demand Growth
(Year-on-year percent change)

9

1

9

7

7

5

5

3

3

1

1

-1

-1
Baseline scenario

-3

-3

Adjustment scenario

-2

-5

140

3

120

0

100

-3

-3

80

80

-6

-6

60

60

-9

-9

40

40

-12

-12

20

20

-15

-2

2011

2012

140

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Inflation
(End of period, percent)

120

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

-5

3

Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

0

Baseline scenario
100

Adjustment scenario

Baseline scenario

-15

Adjustment scenario
0

2011

2012

70

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

External Debt 1/
(Percent of GDP)

65

0

-18

100

25

90

20

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

-18

25

Reserves
(Billions of U.S. dollars)
Baseline scenario

20

Adjustment scenario
80

15

15

70

10

10

60

5

5

50

0

60

55
Baseline scenario
Adjustment scenario
50

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.
1/ The decline in the external debt-to-GDP ratio in the baseline scenario is explained by an assumption that the gaps
in the balance of payments are financed by drawdown of foreign exchange reserves rather than by external
borrowing. Thus, the decline in the debt ratio is consistent with the decline in the reserves.

0

12
10.
The NBRB should be guided by the twin goals of restoring domestic and external
stability. External stability requires further reserves increases and avoiding significant real
appreciation; while domestic stability requires limiting credit growth to about 20 percent,
which is a value implied by the monetary program and is consistent with the inflation
objective. Both credit growth and interest rates are important in Belarus. The choice of credit
growth as an intermediate target is warranted given the relative importance of the credit
channel and since some credit is not sensitive to interest rate changes. However, interest rates
influence the behavior of depositors and some borrowers. Therefore, the staff called for
caution in reducing the rate of refinancing—in staff’s view, the reduction of the refinancing
rate by 500 basis points in the beginning of March was premature as it brought the rate of
refinancing below the March estimate of the expected rate of inflation. 5 While there will be
scope to lower rates further as inflation continues to moderate, rapid rate cuts would risk
resurgence of inflation. Staff believes that the recent appreciation pressures would be better
addressed by a combination of sterilized intervention and additional exchange rate flexibility
rather than interest rate reductions.
Authorities’ Views
11.
The authorities considered the staff’s view of the baseline scenario pessimistic.
The NBRB stressed its commitment to pursue tight monetary policy and the government
argued that the planned reduction in “emission-based” financing of LGP (i.e., financing of
LGP with resources from the budget) would prevent excessive credit growth. They
considered that staff’s adjustment scenario (Table 6) describes the outlook more accurately
than the baseline scenario. At the same time, they considered their framework consistent and
claimed that structural changes in the economy—such as improving energy efficiency in
production—would allow them to meet the growth objective. The authorities agreed with
staff assessment of the real effective exchange rate as being in line with the fundamentals but
pointed out that estimates are subject to a wide margin of error. The NBRB viewed the
current monetary policy as appropriate. In the authorities’ view, the cut in policy interest
rates was justified by a fall in inflation expectations. They were also concerned that high
interest rates were encouraging rapid conversion of FX-denominated assets into
rubel-denominated assets, which they viewed as speculative in nature and subject to risk of
abrupt reversal.
12.
The authorities objected to staff’s assessment of the likelihood of risks and their
potential impact on the economy. They argued that the painful experience of 2011 would
prevent another policy loosening, and therefore tight policies would continue even if the
growth and wage targets are not met. The authorities also see a risk of systemic bank run as
low as confidence in banking system is sustained by state-guarantees of full deposits. On the
5

In March 2012, staff’s annualized 6-month ahead inflation projection was more than 40 percent.

13
external side, the authorities reiterated the importance of developments in Russia for the
Belarus economy and the low risk of a significant downturn in Russia. They are trying to
reduce energy intensity in production to reduce dependence on low-priced natural gas
imported from Russia. In addition, they reiterated that they would use all policy instruments
to counteract external shocks, thereby reducing possible across-the-border spillover effects.
B. The Paradox of Fiscal Policy: Low Deficits, Rapidly Rising Debt
13.
The general government balance has been in moderate deficit or surplus over
the last few years, but debt has increased rapidly. In the last four years the general
government balance has recorded a cumulative surplus of about 2 percent of GDP, while
total public debt (including the NBRB and guaranteed debt) has grown from about 22 percent
of GDP in 2008 to above 50 percent in 2011. The increase reflects mainly external borrowing
to increase reserves and the impact of the significant real depreciation on the debt-to-GDP
ratio.
General Government Debt Increased by 28.8 Percent of GDP Between 2008 and 2011
...and increased by 62.2% of GDP by some others.

Debt was reduced by 33.4% of GDP by some factors...
Primary
balance
10%

Privatization
receipts
28%

Interest rate
growth
dynamics
62%

Increase in
assets
(mainly
reflecting
foreign
borrowing)
and other
factors
41%

Excahnge
rate
depreciation
45%

Banks recap.
and payouts
for
guarantees
14%

14.
Below-the-line and quasi-fiscal operations are the culprits. Below-the-line
operations comprising banks recapitalizations and outlays for government guaranteed debt
amounted to 13.5 percent of GDP in 2008–11 (6.1 percent of GDP in 2011 alone). The
government also conducted significant quasi-fiscal activities in the form of LGP in the
amount of 12 percent of GDP in 2010–11, which boosted domestic demand, widened the
current account deficit and hence created the need for governments’ external borrowing to
close the external financing gap. Since LGP has been extended by commercial banks, it is
likely that the government would fill any shortfall in repayments by recapitalizing the banks,
as has happened in three of the last four years. This rapid buildup of implicit and explicit
liabilities should be assessed in the context of a rapidly increasing total public debt.

14
15.
A clear limit on quasi-fiscal operations and wage restraint should support
macroeconomic stabilization. To this end, staff welcomed authorities’ decision to limit
government financing of LGP to 7 trillion rubels (1.4 percent of GDP) in 2012 and to balance
the amount of planned LGP with the sources of their financing. The staff recommended that
the DB should not be allowed to borrow to finance additional LGP. Consistent with staff
recommendations, the authorities approved a balanced budget for 2012. This implies a fiscal
contraction of about 2 percent of GDP, as measured by the change in the primary cyclically
adjusted augmented fiscal balance. On the other hand, overly ambitious wage targets are
inconsistent with macroeconomic stabilization. After the 30 percent increase in January,
budget sector wages should grow less than 10 percent in nominal term during the remainder
of the year, which is consistent with no change in the real wage in period average terms.
Significant budget sector wage increases could create expectations of similar increases in the
rest of the economy. Large wage increases in SOEs could reignite price pressures, erode
competitiveness and increase inflationary expectations. The mission advised that public
communications should make clear that any wage increases should follow rather than
anticipate productivity growth.
Authorities Views
16.
The authorities agreed with the need for tight control of quasi-fiscal operations.
They pointed out that financing for LGP from the public sector sources will be strictly
limited. At the same time, they pointed out that SOBs may finance LGP using their own
resources on a competitive basis. The authorities believe that the DB should be allowed to
borrow in the market for efficient long-term projects.
17.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to the balanced budget in 2012 but
expressed concerns about wage policy. They argued that budget sector wages are
significantly below the private sector ones and that increases are necessary in order to avoid
losing the best employees. In turn, wages in the rest of the economy are lower than in Russia
and therefore many employees are moving out as there are no restrictions on labor mobility
within the Common Economic Area. Regarding below-the-line operations, the authorities
pointed out that transactions in 2011 were exceptionally high due to the crisis and they will
be much lower in the future.

15
III. THE MEDIUM-TERM AGENDA: MAINTAINING STABILITY AND SECURING
SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
A. Medium-Term Policies to Maintain Stability
18.
Fiscal policy should focus on stabilizing the debt level and rationalizing
government spending. Total government debt needs to be put on a downward path. Phasing
out generalized subsidies to households, including by raising the cost recovery ratio of
household utility tariffs to at least 40 percent this year, would reduce expenditure by about
0.5 percent of GDP, of which 0.1–0.2 percent of GDP should be used for augmenting the
targeted social assistance program. Interest rate subsidies on LGP should be reduced. Staff
supported the government’s intention to reform the civil service, aiming at a smaller and
better paid workforce. Finally, pension reforms would help contain expenditure and address
the issue of a rapidly aging population. The President’s recent proposal to increase pension
benefits for workers postponing retirement goes in the right direction, but there is a need to
ensure that the financial equilibrium of the system is not achieved via increases in the already
high contribution rate.
19.
Developing an inflation targeting (IT) framework would strengthen the
credibility of the NBRB’s policy and shield the economy against external shocks. The
authorities have already taken important steps toward the IT regime, namely changing the
exchange rate regime from a de-facto peg to a managed float in October 2011, setting a low
inflation objective, and enhancing NBRB independence by divesting the NBRB of non-core
assets. Over the medium term, the authorities should develop the essential elements of an IT
regime, namely enhancing the operational autonomy of the NBRB, reducing the share of
regulated prices, imposing hard budget constraints on enterprises, which will increase their
responsiveness to price and interest rate signals, removing quasi-fiscal activities from
commercial banks, and deepening the financial system.
Authorities’ Views
20.
The authorities broadly shared staff’s views but thought they would be difficult
to implement. They argued that reducing subsidies to households is politically and socially
difficult. They also pointed out that the Targeted Social Assistance program is still at an early
stage and has limited funds: therefore, in the short-term, it might not be ready to fully support
vulnerable households if utility tariffs were increased to the cost recovery level. The
authorities believe it is difficult to reduce interest rate subsidies on existing loans, as these are
specified in the lending contracts and cannot be renegotiated. The authorities agreed with a
move towards inflation targeting over the medium term but stressed that the current “manual
control” of the economy distorts the transmission mechanism and the need to fulfill key
prerequisites make the quick transition to IT challenging.

16
B. Can the Current Model Produce Sustainable Growth?
21.
Belarus’ economic model has long relied on high investment supported by
subsidized energy inputs from Russia, directed credit and ample foreign financing. The
model produced high growth rates—generally outperforming peers—while the external
environment remained benign (Figure 5) but was subject to significant vulnerabilities: the
slow pace of structural reform reduced productivity growth and left Belarus dependent on
subsidized energy inputs and external support. Even in the CIS markets, Belarus’ share has
been shrinking. 6 External debt started to increase rapidly in the second half of the last decade
while reserves remained at a dangerously low level.
22.
Structural reforms have been slow, with occasional reversals. Belarus has made
less progress in market reforms than most Eastern European and Central Asian economies
(Figure 6). It has performed poorly on large- and small-scale privatization and enterprise
reform. Little has been done to harden SOEs’ budget constraints; promote competition and
improve corporate governance. Banking sector reform, trade liberalization and competition
policies have been slowly improving. Price liberalization was partially reversed in 2011.
23.
Government interference in the economy has led to a misallocation of resources.
Administrative price controls interfere with market signals, distorting resource allocation.
Mandatory output targets shift companies’ objectives from maximizing profits to maximizing
output, regardless of the cost. This depresses productivity growth, while attempting to meet
specific wage targets increases the gap between real wages and productivity (Box 4
elaborates on wage and productivity developments). Even with continued access to cheap
energy from Russia, a persistent gap between wages and productivity would undermine
Belarus’ external competitiveness and will eventually lead to pressure on the balance of
payments and a possible repeat of the previous crises.

6

World Bank (2012). Belarus Country Economic Memorandum: Economic Transformation for a Sustained
Growth. Report No.66614-BY (forthcoming).

17

Box 4. Wage and Productivity Developments
Real wages in Belarus have persistently grown faster than productivity with the exception
of 2003 and 2009. At the end of 2011, real GDP per
worker was 85 percent higher than its 2002 level, while
real wages were about 140 percent higher.
During the 2009 SBA the authorities in Belarus were
committed to wage restraint. The program included a
commitment by the authorities to strictly limit wage
increases in state controlled enterprises, which covered
about 80 percent of all employees in the Republic of
Belarus. However, wage policies have been loosened
after the program expired.
The increase in real wages in 2010 was particularly pronounced with real wages rising by
33 percent, while productivity has increased only by 7 percent. Similarly, wages in US dollar
terms increased by 37.6 percent y/y in December 2010. This mismatch was among the key factors
behind the 2011 balance of payments crisis. Depreciation during the crisis has brought dollar wages
back to their 2008 level. The authorities recognize the importance of keeping real wage growth in line
with productivity growth. However, their policy of declaring wage targets in dollar terms, and the
resulting wage pressures in SOEs, could lead to a repeat of the crisis.

18
Achieving Efficient Resource Allocation via Privatization and Enterprise Reform
24.
Structural reforms could support macroeconomic stabilization and enhance
Belarus’ medium-term prospects for sustainable growth. Better resource allocation in the
economy can be achieved by price and external trade liberalization, state owned enterprise
reform and privatization. Adjustment costs will be minimized if strong and well-functioning
institutions are in place, including an adequate social safety net. Pursuing reforms integral to
WTO accession would raise Belarus’ medium-term growth prospects.
25.
Price liberalization will impose market discipline and strengthen competition.
Belarus has lagged behind other countries in price liberalization (EBRD) with prices
regulated primarily through price and trade margin ceilings. In 2011 the list of socially
important goods subject to price controls was expanded to cover 25 to 30 percent of the
consumer price basket. In competitive markets price liberalization makes resource allocation
more efficient by providing an incentive to direct capital and labor to producing scarce and
valuable outputs. Increasing market competition by removing opaque state support to
uncompetitive enterprises should limit excessive price increases after liberalization. Targeted
social assistance should be used to mitigate the effects of price liberalization on the poor.
26.
Transforming SOEs into commercially-run corporations will improve the
efficiency of the allocation of resources. Managers should be given greater autonomy and
should be fully responsible for the performance of the SOEs within hard budget constraints.
Government’s interference in their operations should be reduced and the system of state
support streamlined and made transparent. Corporate governance needs to be strengthened by
developing a program for SOEs’ transition to IFRS accounting. Introducing performancebased contracts for managers and performance-based bonuses for workers would raise
productivity. Removing quantitative targets for employment would help reduce labor
hoarding in SOEs and free up resources for more efficient and profitable enterprises.
27.
A privatization process consistent with best international practices would
facilitate economic modernization. Evidence from Russia suggests that privatized
enterprises are more innovative, more productive and adopt new technology and new
management techniques faster than SOEs. 7 The capacity for the National Investment and
Privatization Agency (NIPA) to implement privatization in a professional and transparent
manner could be demonstrated by bringing the first eight companies selected for privatization
with the support of the World Bank to the point of sale. The NIPA should be vested with the
full authority to carry out this privatization and success fees for financial advisors should be
permitted. The list of enterprises to be privatized by the NIPA should be expanded by at
least 20 companies to provide a pipeline for future privatization.
7

Conway et al., 2009, “Product Market Deregulation in Russia,” OECD Economics Department Working
Papers, No. 742, pp. OECD Publishing.

19
Authorities’ Views
28.
The authorities agreed that structural reform is needed. They are implementing
President’s Directive #4 “On the Development of Entrepreneurship and Business Activity in
the Republic of Belarus” which sets out a blueprint of economic liberalization. They have
been working toward gaining a higher rating in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” survey.
The authorities said that strengthening competition; removing red tape; improving the tax
system; and moving to international accounting standards are their priorities.
29.
They disagreed, however, with Fund staff on the scope and the pace of reforms.
The authorities believe that structural reforms should not incur excessive social costs and
should only be implemented after macroeconomic stabilization takes hold. They were not
prepared to embark on enterprise reform due to possible labor dislocation and argued that the
reform could only be started after the targeted social assistance and unemployment benefit
schemes were strengthened. The authorities believe that price liberalization should only be
resumed when inflation expectations were firmly under control. The authorities were not
convinced that privatization would improve economic efficiency and preferred to improve
management of the SOEs.
C. Can the Financial System Support Sustainable Growth?
30.
The financial system is inefficient and causes a growing contingent liability for
the government. Currently, SOBs dominate the banking system holding about two thirds of
all assets. They are primarily engaged in LGP with government guarantees or subsidies on
interest rates and in lending to SOEs. With little emphasis on analyzing borrowers’ credit,
many loans are being rolled over, resulting in consistent liquidity shortfalls at major SOBs.
Annual recapitalizations of SOBs averaged 1 percent of GDP during 2007–10, but were up at
5.3 percent of GDP in 2011. While a major part of the latest recapitalization compensated for
a deterioration in capital adequacy ratios due to a depreciation (as rubel value of
FX-denominated risk-weighted assets increased and capital is held in rubels), it also
indicated increasing asset quality deterioration. Other banks are primarily left to compete for
a small pool of private businesses. This setup results in distorted incentives for SOBs and
undermines private sector development.
Financial Sector Reforms
31.
Establishing a strong DB and giving it responsibility for LGP would free up the
commercial banks to make market-based loans. All LGP should be done via the
Development Bank (DB) to make it transparent. The DB should operate within the resource
envelope consistent with the government’s ceiling on LGP and it should be precluded from
borrowing to support additional activities in the immediate future: this would contain the risk
of losing control over LGP. The mission advised that budget financing of the DB should be
reflected in a government document to be integrated in the budget process and approved
alongside the budget. The risks of the DB’s operations should be recognized in the budget

20
and it should regularly report to the public and financial supervisor. Banks could
competitively bid to become on-lending agents for LGP for commission fees, but the DB
should bear the credit risk. However, even with these measures, risks would remain that
credit growth will not be adequately contained. The remaining LGP stock on SOBs balance
sheets should be gradually phased out possibly using an asset management company. After
major SOBs would be relieved from their quasi-fiscal function legacy, they should be
prepared for privatization with investors who would receive major controlling shares in them.
This would help creating a level playing field for all banks and lead to a more efficient
resources allocation. The full independence of NBRB supervision staff and use of risk-based
supervision would make the financial system more robust.
Authorities’ Views
32.
The authorities considered that the banking system remains resilient, and
favored less fundamental changes. They agreed that SOBs need to shift toward more
commercial lending and they plan to sell major SOBs to well-reputed international banks in
the medium-term. The authorities will continue improving their supervision including with
support from the Fund’s technical assistance. They noted that large SOB recapitalization
in 2011 brought their capital ratios far above prudential requirements and that banks are
successfully increasing their provision levels providing them with better buffers against
shocks in 2012. They expected that tightened liquidity provision to SOBs since end-2011
would improve their liquidity management practices. The authorities were open to a
possibility that all LGP should be done by the DB over the medium term. In 2012, however,
they planned to increase opportunities for private banks to participate in LGP relying on
banks’ own resources.
IV. CAPACITY TO REPAY AND RELATIONSHIP WITH THE FUND
33.
Belarus’ capacity to repay has become strained due to a sharp increase in debt in
recent years (Tables 7 and 8) and policies should be geared toward enhancing it.
External debt has been rising rapidly during the last years, reaching over 61 percent of GDP
by the end of 2011 from 25 percent at the end of 2008. Staff projects that external debt ratio
would decline only gradually (falling to 56 percent of GDP by the end of 2017) and reserves
would remain at significantly low levels (covering only less than 1 month of imports and
about 20 percent of short-term debt during 2014–17), indicating the presence of significant
repayment risks. The proposed stabilization policies would reduce the risks by building up
reserves to sufficient levels over the medium term (covering about 3 months of imports and
short-term debt), which would enhance external creditors’ confidence.
34.
Agreement on a new program would require, as the next step, full commitment
by the authorities to a consistent strategy based on stabilization and reform. The
authorities request for a new Fund arrangement remains active. Staff advised that program
negotiations would require agreement among all policymakers—including at the highest

21
level—to adopt a comprehensive package to restore stability and to embark on the path of
deep structural reform.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
35.
The Belarusian economy is emerging from its latest crisis. Responding to
monetary tightening, credit growth slowed, demand pressures subsided, and inflation began
slowing down. Expenditure and wage restraint further supported stabilization. Exchange rate
unification and a move toward a flexible exchange rate regime helped restore the foreign
exchange market and bring down the current account deficit. The loan agreement with the
ACF supplied discipline (especially in encouraging the authorities to limit LGP) and external
finance. Sale of assets to Gazprom and new loans by Russian banks boosted reserves further.
The economy, however, has been weakened by the crises of 2008–09 and 2011, with rapidly
increasing debt, diminished public confidence in government’s policies, reduced market
access and increased dependence on Russia.
36.
Inconsistent policy goals could jeopardize stability. The authorities say that their
priority is restoring macroeconomic stability: bringing inflation down, narrowing the current
account deficit and maintaining official reserves. However, the growth target is inconsistent
with other macroeconomic objectives, and senior government officials have repeatedly
promised to raise dollar wages. There is a risk that they will pursue high growth and high
wages, as they did in 2010: policies which led directly to the 2011 crisis.
37.
The authorities have adopted many of the policies needed for stabilization, but
they need a consistent framework to provide confidence that good policies will be
maintained. The NBRB has floated the exchange rate, but will need to continue allowing it
to move flexibly to shield the economy from external shocks. Despite recent wavering, the
authorities have generally kept a tight monetary policy, but still need to embed it in monetary
targets in the short term, and inflation targeting over the medium term. The government is
targeting a balanced budget and a sharp reduction in LGP, but their fiscal stance could be
undermined once again by failure to stay within the limits set for LGP and by other quasifiscal activities. In a still uncertain macroeconomic environment, a consistent and disciplined
wage policy is needed this year in both the budgetary sector and the SOEs.
38.
The authorities should also aim to restore the economy’s safety margins. The
government should aim to stabilize and then reduce the debt level over the medium term. The
fiscal plan—reducing general subsidies, reforming the civil service and implementing
pension reform—is welcome, but there are areas of ambiguity and excessive caution in the
authorities’ plans. They need to speed up improvement to the Targeted Social Assistance
program and the unemployment benefit scheme. Quasi-fiscal operations should be phased out
by making the DB the sole provider of new LGP, with LGP financing reflected above the
line in the budget. Most urgently, the authorities need to increase reserves. To do this, they
need continued exchange rate flexibility and macroeconomic discipline.

22
39.
The main source of growth over the medium term lies in improvements in
productivity, which requires structural and financial sector reforms. The authorities are
torn between trying to make their old model function better and adopting a new one. At the
moment, large state enterprises’ exports have been boosted by the exchange rate
depreciation. Lower prices on gas imports from Russia have eased budget and balance of
payments constraints. At the same time, Belarus’ export share in CIS markets keeps
shrinking, and dependence on low-priced energy imports and external support has increased
recently. To improve growth prospects and reduce vulnerabilities, the authorities need to take
the bold step of reducing direct control over the economy. Reducing the government’s role in
the economy through price liberalization, privatization and enterprise reform would improve
resource allocation and strengthen market incentives. The financial sector—at present largely
a vehicle for implementation of government priorities—should become market-based.
Relieving SOBs of the obligation to undertake directed lending after the DB becomes
operational (and at the same time, making sure that the DB itself is run on prudent and
transparent principles) is the crucial next step in the process.
40.
Initiating new program negotiations would require consensus among the
authorities on a strong and consistent stabilization and reform strategy. The mission
exchanged views with the authorities on the prospects for a Fund-supported program, which
was requested by the authorities in May 2011. In view of the loss of policy credibility
following the loosening of policies in 2010, the main barrier to beginning negotiations has
been the absence of a clear commitment by all of the key players. The authorities have been
doing most of the right things, but cannot commit to give up growth and wage targets that are
inconsistent with stability. They are also ambivalent about the deep structural reform that
would be needed. The staff believes that a new program must be sufficiently strong and
credible to garner the support of the IMF’s membership. Unequivocal commitment by all
leading policymakers to strong program objectives would be an essential first step.
41.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Belarus be held on
the standard 12-month cycle.

Figure 1. Belarus: Real Sector Developments, 2008–12

10

Economic activity contracted sharply in Q3 2011...
Real GDP, SA (Quarter-on-quarter growth)

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-10

15

2008Q1 2008Q3 2009Q1 2009Q3 2010Q1 2010Q3 2011Q1 2011Q3
Devaluation ensured that net exports replaced consumption and
investment as a driver of growth.
Contributions to GDP Growth (yoy, percent)
Consumption
Investment
Net exports
Inventories and discrepancy
Real GDP growth

-10

30

8

Industrial Production, SA (Quarter-on-quarter growth)

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

2008Q1 2008Q3 2009Q1 2009Q3 2010Q1 2010Q3 2011Q1 2011Q3

10

Higher demand ensured that inventories-to-production ratio started to
decrease in the recent months.
Inventories and Industrial Production, SA

-6

23

30

-5

...although contraction was less pronounced in the industrial sector.

8

80

Change in inventories / industrial production
Stock of inventories / industrial production (right scale) 1/
15

5

0

0

70

60

50
0

40

-15

2008Q1 2008Q3 2009Q1 2009Q3 2010Q1 2010Q3 2011Q1 2011Q3
Sources: National Statistical Committee; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Lagged 12-month moving average of industrial production.

-15

-5
Jan-08

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

30

Figure 2. Belarus: Inflation Developments, 2009–12
Consumer and producer priceinflation has been slowing down in the
recent months...

175

175

Inflation (Year-on-year percent change)
CPI

150

150

PPI

125
100

100

75

75

50

50

25

25

Jan-11

Jul-11

0

Jan-12

PPI components showed a more varied pattern with energy prices
declining, while equipment price growth remained substantial.
Selected Components of PPI Inflation (Year-on-year percent change)

Nonfood goods

Services

5

0
Jan-10

350

30

25

Chemicals

25
20

15

10

400

Electricity, gas, and water
Machinery and equipment

15

35

30

20

Food

20

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

Accelarating inflation caused a marked reduction in real wages, however,
they are recovering rapidly.

300

Average Monthly Wage Indices, SA (2008 = 100)
Nominal

10

5

5

0

0

-5
Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

-5

Sources: National Statistical Committee; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.

150
140

Real (right scale)
130

250

15

10

24

35

Jul-10

Components of CPI Inflation (Monthly percent change)

125

Average nominal economy-wide wages

0
Jan-10

...with declines evident in all CPI components.
25

120
200
110

150

100

100
50
Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

90

Figure 3. Belarus: External Developments, 2010–12

2,000

The official exchange rate was devalued in May 2011 but a much more
depreciated parallel market exchange rate developed over the summmer,
giving rise to a multiple exchange rate system.
Belarusian Rubel per U.S. Dollar

2,000

3,000

3,000

4,000

4,000

5,000

5,000
Official

6,000

7,000

8,000

8,000

9,000

9,000

50

Jul-10

Feb-11

Sep-11

10,000
Apr-12

Exchange rate adjustment in 2011 boosted export volume growth rates
and reduced import volume growth rates.
Trade Volumes (Year-on-year percent change)

40

1,600

1,600

2,400

2,400

Export volume

3,200
Jan-10

32

40

28

Import volume
30

20

20

24

32
28
24

16

12

12
8

0

8

-10

4
Jan-11

2011Q3

Annual Yields on Eurobonds (Percent)
Ratings changes
Emerging Europe composite
January, 2011 (right scale)
August, 2010 (right scale)

16

0

2011Q1

3,200
Apr-12

Sep-11

20

10

2010Q3

Feb-11

20

10

2010Q1

Jul-10

Eurobond yields subsided.
50

30

-10

800

Sources: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.
1/ IMF staff estimates based on http://prokopovi.ch/random

May-11

Aug-11

Dec-11

Apr-12

4

25

10,000
Jan-10

Rubel Against
the Basket

6,000

Parallel market 1/

7,000

800

The exchange rate has been unified and the official band was
abandoned following the exchange rate unification in October 2011.

26
Figure 4. Belarus: Monetary Developments, 2010–12
Credit to economy has been
slowing down in H2 2011...

60

60

Credit at Constant Exchange Rates
(Year-on-year growth rate)
Growth contribution from non-LGP
Growth contribution from LGP

40

40

Credit to economy

20

20

0
Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

After a gradual increase of its policy rates, the
NBRB reduced the rate of refinancing.

0

...as NBRB's credit to banks leveled off 1/.

50

50

NBRB Credit to Banks
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels)

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0
Jan-10

Jul-10

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

The overnight interbank rate fell significantly on
account of increased rubel liquidity.

0

80

80

70

70

60

60

60

50

50

50

40

40

40

30

30

30

20

20

20

20

10

10

10

10

80

NBRB Policy Interest Rates (Percent)

70

Refinancing rate

60
50

Overnight credit from the
NBRB to banks

40

NBRB deposit rate

30

0
Jan-10

20

Jul-10

Feb-11

Sep-11

0
Apr-12

Growth of term household rubel deposits resumed
after a fall in the beginning of the year...
Household Rubel Deposits
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels)

16

20

Overnight interbank rate
(Percent)

0
Jan-10

6

Jul-10

Feb-11

Sep-11

70

0
Apr-12

...and FX deposits resumed their growth as well.
Household FX Deposits
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

5

80

6
5

16

Total

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

Term
12

12

8

8

4
Jan-10

Jun-10

Nov-10

Apr-11

Oct-11

Mar-12

4

0
Jan-10

Jun-10

Nov-10

Apr-11

Oct-11

Sources: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.
1/ December values show a large reduction on account of a transfer of claims on banks to the Development Bank.

Mar-12

0

27
Figure 5. Belarus: Performance Among Peers, 2002–11 1/

20

Growth in Belarus outperformed the peers' growth
in recent years.
Real GDP Growth (Percent)

20

60

After a period of high inflation,inflation stabilized
close to the levels of the peers.
Inflation (Percent)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

50
10

10

0

0
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

-10

-20

15

2002

2004

2006

2008

-10

2010

Belarus refrained from running high budget
deficits...
General Government Balance (Percent of GDP)

-20

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

-10
-15

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Contrary to the peers, Belarus' current
account deficit has continued to widen...

20

Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP)

-5
-10
-15

20

10

10

0

0

40
30

-10
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

-20
-30
-40

2002

2004

2006

2008

50
40
30

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

200

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

...but credit growth has been among the highest
compared with the peers.
Total Credit Growth (Percent)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

150
100

-10

200
150
100

50

50

0

0

-50

200

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

...with external debt catching up with the levels of
the peers.
External Debt (Percent of GDP)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

150

-10

60

-50

200

150

100

100

50

50

-20
-30

2010

-40

0

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ CEE includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Rep., Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovak Rep., and Turkey . CIS includes Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Rep., Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. The 5th and 95th
percentiles include the entire CEE and CIS samples excluding Belarus.

0

5
5

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3

2
2
2
2

1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0

5
5
5

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3

2
2
2
2

1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0

Price Liberalization

Competition Policy

Sources: EBRD, Transition Indicators.
1/ Higher indicators corresponds to greater transition.
TKM
UZB
BLR
RUS
TJK
KAZ
AZE
BIH
MNE
SRB
UKR
ALB
ARM
BGR
HRV
EST
MKD
GEO
HUN
KGZ
LVA
LTU
MDA
MNG
POL
ROU
SVK
SVN
TUR

5

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3

2
2
2
2

1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0

TKM
BLR
UZB
AZE
BIH
KAZ
KGZ
MDA
MNG
MNE
TJK
ALB
ARM
GEO
RUS
SRB
UKR
BGR
MKD
ROU
TUR
HRV
LVA
LTU
SVN
EST
HUN
POL
SVK

TKM
BLR
AZE
TJK
UZB
SRB
UKR
SVN
RUS
MDA
KAZ
BIH
TUR
MNG
MNE
MKD
HRV
ROU
POL
LVA
KGZ
ARM
ALB
SVK
LTU
HUN
GEO
EST
BGR

5

Large Scale Privatization

TKM
UZB
AZE
BLR
KGZ
TJK
ARM
GEO
KAZ
MNG
RUS
ALB
BIH
MKD
MDA
MNE
SRB
TUR
UKR
ROU
SVN
BGR
HUN
LVA
LTU
POL
SVK
HRV
EST

5

TKM
UZB
BLR
AZE
BIH
HRV
KAZ
MDA
MNE
RUS
SRB
SVN
TJK
TUR
UKR
ALB
ARM
BGR
EST
MKD
GEO
HUN
KGZ
LVA
LTU
MNG
POL
ROU
SVK

5

TKM
TJK
UZB
ALB
AZE
BLR
BIH
GEO
KAZ
KGZ
MNE
ARM
MKD
MDA
MNG
RUS
SRB
UKR
SVN
TUR
BGR
HRV
ROU
HUN
LVA
LTU
POL
SVK
EST

28

Figure 6. Belarus: EBRD Transition Indicators, 2010 1/
Enterprise Restructuring

Trade and FX System

Banking Reform and Interest Rate Liberalization,

5

5

5

29
Table 1. Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

National accounts
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Consumption
Nongovernment
Government
Investment
Of which: fixed
Net exports 1/
Consumer prices
End of period
Average
Monetary accounts
Reserve money
Rubel broad money
Growth of credit to the economy excluding valuation
effect
External debt and balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Gross external debt
Public 2/
Private (mostly state-owned-enterprises)
Savings and investment
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
National saving
Government 3/
Nongovernment 3/
Public sector finance
General government balance
Augmented general government balance
Revenue
Expenditure 4/
Of which:
Wages
Subsidies and transfers
Investment
Gross public debt 5/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
Nominal GDP (trillions of rubels)
Terms of trade, percentage change
REER (official exchange rate), percentage change
Official reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
Months of imports of goods and services
Percent of short-term debt

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

Prel.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
10.2
17.8
12.5
16.4
0.3
28.2
23.8
-9.2

0.2
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-2.9
5.0
1.3

7.7
11.2
7.4
9.0
2.3
18.4
17.5
-3.7

5.3
2.9
2.9
3.5
1.0
3.0
11.1
3.8

3.0
3.0
3.9
3.8
4.0
1.6
1.5
-0.3

3.4
3.7
3.9
4.7
1.2
3.3
3.2
-0.7

4.4
4.1
4.0
5.0
0.5
4.3
4.2
-0.1

4.8
4.8
4.8
5.9
0.5
4.6
4.5
-0.4

4.9
5.0
5.2
6.3
0.5
4.6
4.5
-0.6

5.0
5.1
5.3
6.5
0.5
4.6
4.5
-0.6

13.3
14.8

10.1
13.0

9.9
7.7

108.7
53.2

38.4
66.0

27.5
35.8

20.0
23.6

13.0
16.1

8.0
10.2

6.0
6.9

11.7
22.5

-11.5
0.9

49.5
27.4

84.1
64.1

34.9
42.8

33.5
33.4

26.6
27.5

23.3
23.5

14.0
14.6

11.8
11.8

53.6

30.8

38.8

37.0

42.7

30.7

21.9

18.2

10.8

9.3

(Percent of GDP)
-8.2
-10.3
54.0
-64.3
25.0
6.8
18.1

-12.6
-14.1
43.4
-57.5
45.6
18.9
26.7

-15.0
-16.4
46.0
-62.4
51.1
21.6
29.5

-10.5
-6.7
75.1
-81.8
61.4
27.8
33.6

-6.2
-1.9
79.6
-81.5
60.4
25.1
35.2

-6.6
-3.7
78.4
-82.0
59.5
24.5
35.0

-6.4
-4.2
77.6
-81.8
57.3
21.9
35.5

-6.2
-4.8
75.9
-80.7
56.6
20.9
35.6

-6.0
-5.4
74.6
-80.0
56.3
20.7
35.6

-6.0
-5.7
73.6
-79.3
55.7
20.2
35.4

37.6
10.0
27.6
29.4
6.5
23.0

37.3
8.1
29.2
24.7
7.4
17.3

41.2
8.3
32.9
26.2
4.0
22.2

36.3
5.5
30.8
25.8
2.5
23.3

34.9
5.7
29.3
28.7
3.3
25.4

35.1
6.1
29.0
28.5
3.4
25.2

35.0
6.2
28.8
28.6
2.9
25.7

34.8
6.3
28.5
28.6
2.7
25.9

34.5
6.5
28.0
28.5
2.8
25.6

34.2
6.5
27.7
28.2
2.7
25.5

1.3
-3.5
50.6
54.1

-0.7
-0.7
45.7
46.4

-1.8
-4.3
41.6
45.9

3.1
-3.0
42.0
45.0

0.0
-2.3
39.2
41.5

-0.4
-2.7
39.2
41.9

-0.9
-3.3
38.9
42.1

-1.3
-3.6
38.5
42.1

-1.3
-3.6
38.4
42.0

-1.5
-3.8
38.1
41.9

6.6
11.5
10.0
21.7

6.7
11.7
8.1
34.9

7.0
8.3
8.3
41.0

6.8
7.8
5.5
50.6

6.7
7.5
5.7
37.7

6.8
7.4
6.1
33.6

6.8
7.4
6.2
29.0

6.8
7.2
6.3
26.9

6.8
7.0
6.5
25.8

6.8
7.0
6.5
24.8

60.8
129.8
8.8
1.6
3.1
1.2
40.4

49.2
137.4
-10.3
-4.5
5.7
1.8
63.2

55.2
164.5
0.5
-5.0
5.0
1.2
42.0

55.1
274.3
5.9
-11.7
7.9
1.9
56.9

…
495.2
7.1
-5.7
5.5
1.2
38.9

…
685.3
-0.6
0.0
4.8
1.0
32.4

…
873.8
-0.9
0.0
3.2
0.6
20.8

…
1,052.9
-0.4
0.0
2.5
0.5
15.7

…
1,207.0
-0.3
0.0
2.9
0.5
17.5

…
1,349.8
0.2
0.0
3.3
0.5
19.0

Quota (2010): SDR 386.4 million (589.7 million U.S. dollars)
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Gross consolidated external debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).
3/ The reduction in government saving and a corresponding increase in nongovernment saving include bank recapitalization and layouts related to public guaranteed
debt in amount of 2.5 percent of GDP in 2010 and 6.1 percent of GDP in 2011.
4/ Refers to the augmented expenditure of the general government.
5/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).

30
Table 2. Belarus: Balance of Payments (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

-4,249

-4,456

-4,739

-1,088 -2,248 -2,719 -3,311
-1,072 -1,809 -2,106 -2,642
-16
-439
-612
-669
45,653 48,027 50,279 52,382
16,692 15,835 15,473 14,550
28,961 32,192 34,807 37,833
-46,741 -50,275 -52,998 -55,693
-17,764 -17,644 -17,579 -17,192
-28,977 -32,631 -35,419 -38,502
2,178
2,448
2,636
2,868
5,697
6,410
6,933
7,538
-3,519 -3,963 -4,297 -4,669
-2,055 -1,879 -1,770 -1,869
-2,597 -2,363 -2,295 -1,938

-3,960
-3,096
-864
55,014
13,902
41,111
-58,974
-16,998
-41,975
3,104
8,193
-5,089
-1,866
-1,734

-4,520
-3,489
-1,031
58,289
13,477
44,812
-62,809
-16,966
-45,843
3,459
9,014
-5,555
-2,105
-1,573

Proj.

Prel.
(Millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account
Trade balance (goods)
Energy balance
Nonenergy balance
Exports
Energy
Nonenergy
Imports
Energy
Nonenergy
Services
Receipts
Payments
Income, net
Transfers, net 1/
Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Overall FDI, net
Portfolio investment, net
Trade credits, net
Loans, net
Government and monetary authorities, net
Banks, net
Other sectors, net
Other, net 2/
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Reserves ("-" denotes an increase)
Net use of Fund resources
Other donors and exceptional financing items
Memorandum items:
Stock of reserves
Reserves (months of next year's imports of goods
and services)
Reserves (percent of short-term debt)
Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage
change of period average, "+" denotes appreciation)
Export volume (annual percentage change)
Import volume (annual percentage change)
Domestic demand growth (annual percentage
change)
Partner country growth (percent) 3/
Russia

-4,988

-6,178

-8,278

-5,775

-6,237 -6,957 -9,078 -3,716
-2,000 -3,378 -5,131 -4,551
-4,237 -3,579 -3,946
834
32,805 21,361 25,405 41,410
11,866
7,844
6,851 14,078
20,939 13,517 18,555 27,332
-39,042 -28,318 -34,483 -45,126
-13,865 -11,222 -11,982 -18,629
-25,176 -17,096 -22,501 -26,497
1,629
1,389
1,623
2,078
4,258
3,504
4,501
5,261
-2,630 -2,116 -2,878 -3,183
-551
-883 -1,163 -1,558
171
274
340 -2,579

-3,563

-4,042

-4,148

4,287
137
4,150
2,150
5
289
2,085
1,266
603
216
-380

5,066
160
4,906
1,782
19
657
1,067
727
21
319
1,381

6,444
145
6,299
1,352
1,186
568
3,062
717
2,181
163
131

4,771
190
4,581
3,928
854
561
486
-327
70
804
-1,248

1,671
198
1,473
2,034
-234
-180
519
572
-258
205
-666

4,109
211
3,897
2,392
0
400
1,893
1,489
0
404
-787

3,939
223
3,716
2,588
0
400
1,325
619
252
454
-597

3,642
140
3,502
2,823
0
400
1,267
467
289
511
-988

4,867
150
4,717
3,202
0
400
1,701
810
317
575
-587

5,105
161
4,944
3,327
0
400
1,846
862
337
646
-630

-301
-1,003

319
-793

558
-1,276

1,555
551

0
-1,892

0
66

0
-208

0
-607

0
411

0
366

1,003
879
0
124

793
-2,443
2,838
398

1,276
809
665
-198

-551
-2,791
0
2,240

1,892
2,396
-384
-120

-66
721
-1,667
880

208
1,575
-1,367
0

607
691
-84
0

-411
-411
0
0

-366
-366
0
0

3,061
1.2

5,653
1.8

5,031
1.2

7,916
1.9

5,520
1.2

4,799
1.0

3,224
0.6

2,533
0.5

2,944
0.5

3,309
0.5

40.4
1.6

63.2
-4.5

42.0
-5.0

56.9
-17.8

38.9
1.3

32.4
0.0

20.8
0.0

15.7
0.0

17.5
0.0

19.0
0.0

1.5
14.3
17.8

-11.5
-12.6
-1.1

2.8
8.0
11.2

29.5
15.8
2.9

6.8
6.1
3.0

2.4
3.1
3.7

4.5
4.0
4.1

3.0
3.2
4.8

3.0
3.5
5.0

3.2
3.6
5.1

5.2

-7.8

4.3

4.3

4.0

4.0

3.9

3.9

3.8

3.8

Sources: Belarus authorities; and IMF staff estimations.
1/ Values for 2011-17 include transfer of export duty on oil products to the Russian budget.
2/ Includes 2009 SDR allocation.
3/ Based on latest projection available.

31
Table 2. Belarus: Balance of Payments (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 1/ (concluded)
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

Prel.
(Percent of GDP)
Current account

-8.2

-12.6

-15.0

-10.5

-6.2

-6.6

-6.4

-6.2

-6.0

-6.0

-7.6
-10.3
-3.3
-7.0
54.0
19.5
-64.3
-22.8
2.7
-0.9
0.3

-11.3
-14.1
-6.9
-7.3
43.4
15.9
-57.5
-22.8
2.8
-1.8
0.6

-13.5
-16.4
-9.3
-7.1
46.0
12.4
-62.4
-21.7
2.9
-2.1
0.6

-3.0
-6.7
-8.3
1.5
75.1
25.5
-81.8
-33.8
3.8
-2.8
-4.7

1.9
-1.9
-1.9
0.0
79.6
29.1
-81.5
-31.0
3.8
-3.6
-4.5

0.3
-3.7
-3.0
-0.7
78.4
25.8
-82.0
-28.8
4.0
-3.1
-3.9

-0.1
-4.2
-3.3
-0.9
77.6
23.9
-81.8
-27.1
4.1
-2.7
-3.5

-0.6
-4.8
-3.8
-1.0
75.9
21.1
-80.7
-24.9
4.2
-2.7
-2.8

-1.2
-5.4
-4.2
-1.2
74.6
18.9
-80.0
-23.1
4.2
-2.5
-2.4

-1.3
-5.7
-4.4
-1.3
73.6
17.0
-79.3
-21.4
4.4
-2.7
-2.0

Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Overall FDI
Portfolio investment, net
Trade credits, net
Loans, net
Government and monetary authorities, net
Banks, net
Other sectors, net
Other (excluding arrears), net 2/

7.1
0.2
6.8
3.5
0.0
0.5
3.4
2.1
1.0
0.4
-0.6

10.3
0.3
10.0
3.6
0.0
1.3
2.2
1.5
0.0
0.6
2.8

11.7
0.3
11.4
2.4
2.1
1.0
5.5
1.3
4.0
0.3
0.2

8.7
0.3
8.3
7.1
1.5
1.0
0.9
-0.6
0.1
1.5
-2.3

2.9
0.3
2.6
3.5
-0.4
-0.3
0.9
1.0
-0.5
0.4
-1.2

6.7
0.3
6.4
3.9
0.0
0.7
3.1
2.4
0.0
0.7
-1.3

6.1
0.3
5.7
4.0
0.0
0.6
2.0
1.0
0.4
0.7
-0.9

5.3
0.2
5.1
4.1
0.0
0.6
1.8
0.7
0.4
0.7
-1.4

6.6
0.2
6.4
4.3
0.0
0.5
2.3
1.1
0.4
0.8
-0.8

6.4
0.2
6.2
4.2
0.0
0.5
2.3
1.1
0.4
0.8
-0.8

Errors and omissions
Overall balance

-0.5
-1.7

0.6
-1.6

1.0
-2.3

2.8
1.0

0.0
-3.3

0.0
0.1

0.0
-0.3

0.0
-0.9

0.0
0.6

0.0
0.5

1.7
1.4
0.0
0.2

1.6
-5.0
5.8
0.8

2.3
1.5
1.2
-0.4

-1.0
-5.1
0.0
4.1

3.3
4.2
-0.7
-0.2

-0.1
1.2
-2.7
1.4

0.3
2.4
-2.1
0.0

0.9
1.0
-0.1
0.0

-0.6
-0.6
0.0
0.0

-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0

Trade balance (goods and services)
Trade balance (goods)
Of which: energy balance
Nonenergy balance
Exports
Of which : energy exports
Imports
Of which: energy imports
Services
Income, net
Transfers, net 1/

Financing
Reserves ("-" denotes an increase)
Net use of Fund resources
Other donors and exceptional financing items
Sources: Belarus authorities; and IMF staff estimations.

1/ Values for 2011-17 include transfer of export duty on oil products to the Russian budget.
2/ Includes 2009 SDR allocation.
3/ Based on latest projection available.

32
Table 3. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

Prel.
1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other
Revenue of budgetary funds

50.9
4.2
6.0
11.4
3.9
1.3
10.6
7.8
5.7

46.6
4.3
4.6
12.1
3.6
1.6
8.0
7.7
4.7

48.8
5.4
5.6
16.2
4.4
1.9
5.8
6.7
2.9

85.6
9.3
8.7
26.5
5.6
2.5
15.1
12.7
5.1

144.6
16.4
13.7
45.1
10.1
4.6
27.8
20.4
6.6

199.9
22.7
18.9
62.4
14.0
6.4
39.1
28.1
8.5

253.2
28.9
24.1
79.5
17.8
8.1
50.9
33.7
10.2

302.7
34.8
29.0
95.8
21.5
9.8
62.2
38.1
11.5

346.0
39.9
33.3
109.8
24.6
11.2
72.3
42.3
12.4

385.0
44.6
37.2
122.8
27.6
12.5
79.5
47.6
13.1

Expenditure (economic classification) 1/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending
Other

50.9
8.6
2.3
8.7
0.7
14.9
13.0
2.6
0.0

49.0
9.3
2.5
8.7
1.1
16.0
11.2
0.4
0.0

53.0
11.5
3.1
10.0
1.1
13.7
13.6
-0.1
0.0

79.1
18.6
5.0
15.4
3.3
21.3
15.2
0.4
0.0

145.6
33.1
8.9
27.7
10.5
36.9
28.0
0.4
0.0

201.5
46.5
12.6
37.7
12.6
50.4
41.8
0.0
0.0

258.0
59.3
16.0
48.0
16.6
64.3
53.8
0.0
0.0

309.7
71.5
19.3
57.9
19.8
75.3
65.9
0.0
0.0

352.5
81.9
22.1
66.4
20.0
83.9
78.1
0.0
0.0

391.3
91.6
24.7
74.2
19.5
93.9
87.4
0.0
0.0

Balance (economic classification)

0.0

-2.4

-4.2

6.5

-1.0

-1.6

-4.8

-7.0

-6.5

-6.3

Bank restructuring measures
Net lending to financial institutions
Outlays related to guaranteed debt

2.0
4.3
…

0.0
…
…

2.1
…
2.1

14.5
0.0
2.2

7.4
0.0
4.0

10.3
0.0
5.6

13.1
0.0
7.1

15.8
0.0
8.6

18.1
0.0
9.8

20.2
0.0
11.0

Augmented balance

-6.3

-2.4

-8.4

-10.3

-12.4

-17.4

-25.0

-31.3

-34.4

-37.5

2. Social protection fund
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

14.7
13.0
1.7

16.1
14.7
1.4

19.7
18.4
1.3

29.6
27.5
2.1

49.6
48.7
0.9

68.5
69.8
-1.3

86.4
89.9
-3.4

103.1
109.3
-6.3

117.0
126.5
-9.6

129.4
142.9
-13.4

1.7

-1.0

-2.9

8.6

-0.1

-2.9

-8.3

-13.2

-16.1

-19.7

-4.6

-1.0

-7.1

-8.2

-11.6

-18.7

-28.5

-37.6

-44.0

-50.9

0.0

-0.3

0.4

-0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4.6
1.3
3.0
0.3
-1.6
0.2
-1.8
...
1.9

1.3
1.9
11.5
-12.0
-11.7
-11.7
-2.2
2.2
-0.3

6.7
1.1
4.6
1.0
0.8
1.0
-1.0
0.8
0.2

8.6
20.3
9.1
-20.8
-27.1
-48.3
4.9
16.3
6.3

11.6
7.9
4.2
-0.4
-0.4
6.4
-15.2
...
0.0

18.7
12.5
26.6
-20.4
-20.4
-32.1
-12.3
...
0.0

28.5
16.2
8.4
3.9
3.9
9.7
-12.7
...
0.0

37.6
19.6
7.1
10.8
10.8
4.5
-11.4
...
0.0

44.0
24.1
14.3
5.7
5.7
18.8
-10.9
...
0.0

50.9
25.0
14.7
11.2
11.2
9.6
-9.8
...
0.0

…

…

17.6

23.3

26.4

35.9

45.9

53.4

59.1

64.4

…

…

10.6

15.2

14.9

17.1

17.5

15.8

15.1

13.5

Balance of the general government
Augmented balance of the general government
Statistical discrepancy
3. Financing (cash)
Privatization
Foreign financing, net 2/
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank
Deposit money banks (including SPF)
Revaluation effect
Nonbank
Memorandum items:
Fiscal deficit including lending under
government programs
Of which: lending under government
programs

Sources: Ministry of Finance; SPF; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
2/ Includes unidentified financing that is assumed to be filled by government borrowing from abroad.
3/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).

33
Table 3. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17

1/ (continued)

(Percent of annual GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

Prel.
1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other
Revenue of budgetary funds

39.3
3.2
4.6
8.8
3.0
1.0
8.2
6.0
4.4

33.9
3.1
3.4
8.8
2.6
1.2
5.8
5.6
3.4

29.6
3.3
3.4
9.9
2.6
1.1
3.5
4.0
1.8

31.2
3.4
3.2
9.7
2.0
0.9
5.5
4.6
1.9

29.2
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
5.6
4.1
1.3

29.2
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
5.7
4.1
1.2

29.0
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
5.8
3.9
1.2

28.8
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
5.9
3.6
1.1

28.7
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
6.0
3.5
1.0

28.5
3.3
2.8
9.1
2.0
0.9
5.9
3.5
1.0

Expenditure (economic classification) 1/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending
Other

39.2
6.6
1.8
6.7
0.6
11.5
10.0
2.0
0.0

35.7
6.7
1.8
6.3
0.8
11.7
8.1
0.3
0.0

32.2
7.0
1.9
6.1
0.7
8.3
8.3
0.0
0.0

28.8
6.8
1.8
5.6
1.2
7.8
5.5
0.2
0.0

29.4
6.7
1.8
5.6
2.1
7.5
5.7
0.1
0.0

29.4
6.8
1.8
5.5
1.8
7.4
6.1
0.0
0.0

29.5
6.8
1.8
5.5
1.9
7.4
6.2
0.0
0.0

29.4
6.8
1.8
5.5
1.9
7.2
6.3
0.0
0.0

29.2
6.8
1.8
5.5
1.7
7.0
6.5
0.0
0.0

29.0
6.8
1.8
5.5
1.4
7.0
6.5
0.0
0.0

Balance (economic classification)

0.0

-1.8

-2.6

2.4

-0.2

-0.2

-0.6

-0.7

-0.5

-0.5

Bank restructuring measures
Net lending to financial institutions
Outlays related to guaranteed debt

1.5
3.3
…

0.0
…
…

1.3
…
1.3

5.3
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

1.5
0.0
0.8

Augmented balance

-4.8

-1.8

-5.1

-3.7

-2.5

-2.5

-2.9

-3.0

-2.9

-2.8

2. Social Protection Fund
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

11.3
10.0
1.3

11.7
10.7
1.1

12.0
11.2
0.8

10.8
10.0
0.8

10.0
9.8
0.2

10.0
10.2
-0.2

9.9
10.3
-0.4

9.8
10.4
-0.6

9.7
10.5
-0.8

9.6
10.6
-1.0

1.3

-0.7

-1.8

3.1

0.0

-0.4

-0.9

-1.3

-1.3

-1.5

-3.5

-0.7

-4.3

-3.0

-2.3

-2.7

-3.3

-3.6

-3.6

-3.8

0.0

-0.3

0.2

-0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.5
1.0
2.3
0.2
-1.2
0.1
-1.3
…
1.5

1.0
1.4
8.4
-8.8
-8.5
-8.5
-1.6
1.6
-0.2

4.0
0.6
2.8
0.6
0.5
0.6
-0.6
0.5
0.1

3.1
7.4
3.3
-7.6
-9.9
-17.6
1.8
6.0
2.3

2.3
1.6
0.8
-0.1
-0.1
1.3
-3.1
…
0.0

2.7
1.8
3.9
-3.0
-3.0
-4.7
-1.8
…
0.0

3.3
1.9
1.0
0.4
0.4
1.1
-1.4
…
0.0

3.6
1.9
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.4
-1.1
…
0.0

3.6
2.0
1.2
0.5
0.5
1.6
-0.9
…
0.0

3.8
1.9
1.1
0.8
0.8
0.7
-0.7
…
0.0

…

…

10.7

8.5

5.3

5.2

5.3

5.1

4.9

4.8

…

…

6.4

5.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.3

1.0

21.7
129.8

34.9
137.4

41.0
164.5

50.6
274.3

37.7
495.2

33.6
685.3

29.0
873.8

26.9
1,052.9

25.8
1,207.0

24.8
1,349.8

Balance of the general government
Augmented balance of the general government
Statistical discrepancy
3. Financing (cash)
Privatization
Foreign financing, net 2/
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank
Deposit money banks (including SPF)
Revaluation effect
Nonbank
Memorandum items:
Fiscal deficit including lending under
government programs
Of which: lending under government
programs
Gross public debt 3/
GDP (trillions of Belarusian rubels)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; SPF; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
2/ Includes unidentified financing that is assumed to be filled by government borrowing from abroad.
3/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).

34
Table 3. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections (Baseline Scenario) in GFSM 2001 Format, 2008–17 1/ (concluded)
(Percent of annual GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.
Revenue
Taxes
Social contributions
Grants
Other revenue

50.6
33.2
11.3
…
6.0

45.7
28.3
11.7
…
5.6

41.6
25.6
12.0
…
4.0

42.0
26.6
10.8
…
4.6

39.2
25.1
10.0
…
4.1

39.2
25.1
10.0
…
4.1

38.9
25.1
9.9
…
3.9

38.5
25.1
9.8
…
3.6

38.4
25.2
9.7
…
3.5

38.1
25.0
9.6
…
3.5

Expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Use of goods and services
Consumption of fixed capital
Interest
Subsidies
Grants
Social benefits
Other expense

48.8
41.0
8.5
6.7
0.1
0.6
13.6
0.0
10.0
1.5

46.1
40.3
8.5
6.3
0.1
0.8
13.9
0.0
10.7
0.0

44.7
39.5
8.9
6.1
0.1
0.7
11.4
0.0
11.2
1.3

44.0
39.9
8.6
5.6
0.1
1.2
9.1
0.0
10.0
5.3

40.7
36.4
8.5
5.6
0.1
2.1
8.8
0.0
9.8
1.5

41.1
36.5
8.6
5.5
0.1
1.8
8.8
0.0
10.2
1.5

41.3
36.7
8.6
5.5
0.1
1.9
8.8
0.0
10.3
1.5

41.3
36.6
8.6
5.5
0.1
1.9
8.7
0.0
10.4
1.5

41.2
36.3
8.6
5.5
0.1
1.7
8.5
0.0
10.5
1.5

41.1
36.2
8.6
5.5
0.1
1.4
8.5
0.0
10.6
1.5

7.8
7.8
…
…

5.8
5.8
…
…

5.2
5.2
…
…

4.1
4.1
…
…

4.2
4.2
…
…

4.6
4.6
…
…

4.6
4.6
…
…

4.7
4.7
…
…

4.8
4.8
…
…

4.8
4.8
…
…

Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets
Acquisitions of nonfinancial assets
Disposals of nonfinancial assets
Consumption of fixed capital
Gross operating balance

9.6

5.3

2.1

2.1

2.8

2.6

2.2

1.9

2.0

1.9

Net lending (+) / borrowing (–)

1.8

-0.4

-3.1

-2.0

-1.4

-1.9

-2.4

-2.8

-2.8

-3.0

Net acquisition of financial assets
Domestic
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts receivable
Foreign
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts receivable
Net incurrence of liabilities
Domestic
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts payable
Foreign
SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts payable

…
5.3
…
…
5.3
…
…
…
…
-1.0
…
…
…
…
-1.0
…
…
…
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
2.3
…
…
…
2.3
…
…
…
…

6.0
7.4
7.1
…
0.3
…
…
…
…
-1.4
…
…
…
…
-1.4
…
…
…
1.0
-1.7
…
-1.7
…
…
…
…
…
2.7
…
…
0.0
2.7
…
…
…
…

1.5
2.1
0.9
…
1.2
…
…
…
…
-0.6
…
…
…
…
-0.6
…
…
…
3.5
1.5
…
1.5
…
…
…
…
…
2.0
…
…
2.2
-0.3
…
…
…
…

6.4
13.8
12.8
…
1.0
…
…
…
…
-7.4
…
…
…
…
-7.4
…
…
…
11.2
5.2
…
5.2
…
…
…
…
…
6.0
…
…
1.5
4.6
…
…
…
…

-0.6
1.0
0.1
…
0.9
…
…
…
…
-1.6
…
…
…
…
-1.6
…
…
…
0.8
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
0.8
…
…
-0.4
1.2
…
…
…
…

2.0
3.8
3.0
…
0.8
…
…
…
…
-1.8
…
…
…
…
-1.8
…
…
…
3.9
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
3.9
…
…
0.0
3.9
…
…
…
…

-1.5
0.4
-0.4
…
0.8
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
1.0
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
1.0
…
…
0.0
1.0
…
…
…
…

-2.1
-0.2
-1.0
…
0.8
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
0.7
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
0.7
…
…
0.0
0.7
…
…
…
…

-1.7
0.3
-0.5
…
0.8
…
…
…
…
-2.0
…
…
…
…
-2.0
…
…
…
1.2
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
1.2
…
…
0.0
1.2
…
…
…
…

-1.9
0.0
-0.8
…
0.8
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
…
-1.9
…
…
…
1.1
0.0
…
0.0
…
…
…
…
…
1.1
…
…
0.0
1.1
…
…
…
…

0.0

-5.4

-1.1

2.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.3
-3.5
14.9
5.9

-0.7
-0.7
16.0
10.0

-1.8
-4.3
19.4
10.9

3.1
-3.0
22.7
15.1

0.0
-2.3
12.6
15.4

-0.4
-2.7
9.1
18.3

-0.9
-3.3
7.1
18.2

-1.3
-3.6
5.9
17.8

-1.3
-3.6
5.2
17.8

-1.5
-3.8
4.6
17.7

Statistical Discrepacy
Memorandum items:
General government balance
Augmented general government balance
Domestic liabilities of the general government
Foreign liabilities of the general government
Sources: Ministry of Finance; SPF; and IMF staff estimates.

1/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
2/ Includes unidentified financing that is assumed to be filled by government borrowing from abroad.
3/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).

Table 4. Belarus: Monetary Authorities' Accounts (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17 1/
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)
2008

2009

2010

2011

Prel.

2012

2013

Feb.

Dec.

Prel.

Proj.

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

7.7
7.3
3.8
2.2
1.2
0.4

6.8
6.6
3.6
1.7
1.3
0.2

10.2
10.2
4.5
4.0
1.7
0.0

18.8
16.9
6.7
7.4
2.8
1.9

20.9
20.7
6.9
11.0
2.7
0.2

25.3
24.1
9.1
11.0
4.0
1.2

33.8
32.2
12.1
16.3
3.7
1.6

42.8
41.0
15.5
20.8
4.8
1.7

52.7
50.7
19.1
27.7
3.9
2.0

60.1
58.1
21.9
31.7
4.5
2.0

67.1
65.0
24.5
37.4
3.1
2.2

Net foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
Net foreign assets (convertible)
Billions of U.S. dollars
Foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
Of which gross international reserves
Billions of U.S. dollars
Foreign liabilities
Billions of U.S. dollars
Of which : use of IMF credit (billions of U.S. dollars)

7.0
3.2
5.8
2.6
8.0
3.6
6.7
3.1
1.0
0.4
0.0

14.0
4.9
15.0
5.2
15.3
5.3
16.2
5.7
1.2
0.4
2.9

10.7
3.6
9.5
3.2
16.3
5.4
15.1
5.0
5.6
1.9
3.5

65.7
7.9
52.9
6.3
78.9
9.4
66.1
7.9
13.2
1.6
3.5

71.4
8.8
52.6
6.5
83.5
10.3
64.7
8.0
12.1
1.5
3.5

56.0
5.9
41.4
4.3
67.3
7.1
52.7
5.5
11.3
1.2
3.1

88.5
6.8
68.6
5.3
82.3
6.3
62.4
4.8
-6.3
-0.5
1.5

92.4
6.6
71.0
5.1
66.5
4.8
45.1
3.2
-25.9
-1.8
0.1

99.2
6.0
73.8
4.5
67.2
4.1
41.9
2.5
-32.0
-1.9
0.0

105.0
6.5
80.1
4.9
72.6
4.5
47.8
2.9
-32.4
-2.0
0.0

122.1
6.8
94.7
5.3
86.5
4.8
59.1
3.3
-35.6
-2.0
0.0

0.7
1.2
-4.0
0.0
-4.0
1.7

-7.2
-4.7
-15.5
0.0
-15.5
1.0

-0.5
16.8
-14.6
1.1
-15.7
1.0

-47.0
-29.5
-62.9
1.0
-64.0
1.0

-50.5
-27.8
-61.1
0.6
-61.7
1.0

-30.7
-9.2
-56.5
1.0
-57.6
1.0

-54.8
-9.4
-88.6
1.0
-89.7
1.0

-49.6
16.1
-78.9
1.0
-80.0
1.0

-46.5
27.7
-74.5
1.0
-75.5
1.0

-44.9
25.3
-55.7
1.0
-56.8
1.0

-54.9
16.9
-46.1
1.0
-47.2
1.0

5.7
5.2
3.4
3.1
0.3
0.1
1.8
1.8
0.0
0.0
-0.6
…

16.6
10.9
8.6
8.2
0.4
0.1
2.3
2.2
0.0
0.1
-2.6
-0.1

16.7
31.3
28.0
26.0
1.9
0.6
3.4
3.0
0.3
0.1
-17.2
-12.1

64.9
33.4
19.1
13.5
5.6
0.7
14.2
0.3
0.1
13.9
-17.4
-33.1

62.7
33.3
18.7
13.3
5.4
0.7
14.6
0.2
0.2
14.2
-22.7
-32.9

58.6
47.3
33.0
26.6
6.4
0.7
14.2
0.3
0.1
13.9
-21.5
-37.9

90.7
79.2
65.7
57.0
8.7
0.7
13.5
0.3
0.1
13.2
-45.4
-50.4

81.0
95.0
82.2
72.8
9.4
0.7
12.9
0.3
0.1
12.5
-65.7
-52.5

76.5
102.2
90.0
78.9
11.1
0.7
12.2
0.3
0.1
11.9
-74.2
-59.3

57.8
81.0
69.4
58.6
10.9
0.7
11.6
0.3
0.0
11.3
-70.2
-54.8

48.2
63.0
52.0
52.0
0.0
0.0
11.0
0.2
0.0
10.7
-71.8
-55.9

11.7
7.0
4.7

-11.5
7.7
4.1

49.5
7.1
3.9

84.1
8.2
3.7

114.8
8.7
3.8

34.9
8.9
3.5

33.5
9.2
3.4

26.6
9.3
3.3

23.3
9.0
3.0

14.0
8.7
2.8

11.8
8.6
2.7

2.8
0.23
10.2
13.3

3.1
0.21
0.2
10.1

2.6
0.20
7.7
9.9

2.6
0.18
5.3
108.7

2.2
0.18
…
107.3

2.6
0.18
3.0
38.4

2.6
0.18
3.4
27.5

2.6
0.18
4.4
20.0

2.6
0.18
4.8
13.0

2.6
0.18
4.9
8.0

2.6
0.18
5.0
6.0

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Net credit to local government and state enterprises
Net credit to central government
Claims on government (loans and government
securities)
Deposits of central government
Credit to economy
Credit to banks
National currency
Foreign currencies
Billions of U.S. dollars
Credit to nonbanks
Claims on private sector
Credit to nonfinancial public enterprises
Credit to other financial institutions
Other items, net
of which banks' FX deposits excluded from monetary base
Memorandum items:
12-month percent change in reserve money
Velocity of rubel money (average)
Velocity of broad money (including foreign exchange part) at
current exchange rate (average)
Ruble broad money multiplier
Currency-to-deposit ratio
Real GDP growth (annual)
End-of-period CPI inflation (year-on-year percent change)
Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates.

1/ Data for 2009-2011 have been revised in accordance with STA recommendations. The most significant revisions included (i) excluding banks' FX deposits and NBRB's securities issued for the
purpose of absorbing liquidity from the monetary base and (ii) re-classifying the Deposit Insurance Agency from general government to non-bank financial instututions.

35

Reserve money
Rubel reserve money
Currency outside banks
Required reserves
Time deposits, NBB securities, and nonbank deposits
Foreign currency reserve money

Table 5. Belarus: Monetary Survey (Baseline Scenario), 2008–17
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)
2008

2009

2010

2011

Prel.

2012

2013

Feb.

Dec.

Prel.

Proj.

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

31.0
20.5
3.8
16.0
0.7
10.2
0.2
54.7

38.1
20.7
3.6
16.5
0.5
16.2
1.1
63.9

50.3
26.4
4.5
20.9
1.0
22.1
1.7
82.5

111.2
43.4
6.7
34.5
2.2
64.1
3.7
98.6

114.9
45.9
6.9
36.2
2.8
65.1
3.9
103.6

159.3
61.9
9.1
49.7
3.1
92.1
5.3
130.2

235.1
82.6
12.1
66.3
4.2
144.2
8.3
158.9

299.7
105.3
15.5
84.5
5.3
183.9
10.6
194.2

399.4
130.0
19.1
104.3
6.6
254.7
14.7
233.0

457.8
149.0
21.9
119.6
7.5
292.0
16.8
269.9

539.3
166.6
24.5
133.7
8.4
352.4
20.3
298.5

Net foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
NFA of central bank
NFA of deposit money banks

3.1
1.4
7.0
-3.9

8.0
2.8
14.0
-6.0

-2.1
-0.7
10.7
-12.7

34.8
4.2
65.7
-30.9

40.7
5.0
71.4
-30.7

24.7
2.6
56.0
-31.3

49.7
3.8
88.5
-38.9

55.4
4.0
92.4
-37.0

67.0
4.1
99.2
-32.2

77.7
4.8
105.0
-27.2

97.3
5.5
122.1
-24.7

27.9
39.2
-9.8
-7.2
7.0
14.3
-2.6
48.9
11.4
37.2
0.4
-11.3
-13.0
1.7

30.1
45.1
-23.6
-22.6
3.7
26.3
-1.0
68.7
17.0
50.8
0.9
-15.0
-16.2
1.2

52.3
72.6
-23.7
-24.4
3.4
27.8
0.8
96.2
21.8
72.6
1.8
-20.2
-21.7
1.5

76.4
104.6
-67.1
-66.2
10.9
77.1
-0.9
171.7
39.8
114.8
17.0
-28.2
-11.5
-16.7

74.2
107.9
-66.8
-65.3
11.1
76.5
-1.4
174.6
64.9
92.4
17.4
-33.7
-20.7
-12.9

134.6
177.9
-75.9
-75.0
10.9
85.9
-0.9
253.8
94.0
141.1
18.7
-43.3
-18.9
-24.4

185.4
249.3
-120.2
-119.4
10.9
130.3
-0.9
369.5
139.7
209.5
20.3
-63.9
-29.7
-34.2

244.3
341.0
-123.2
-122.4
10.9
133.3
-0.9
464.2
177.1
265.6
21.6
-96.7
-44.9
-51.7

332.4
458.4
-130.2
-129.3
10.9
140.2
-0.9
588.5
226.1
339.0
23.5
-125.9
-75.0
-50.9

380.1
524.1
-122.3
-121.5
10.9
132.4
-0.9
646.4
249.1
373.3
24.0
-144.0
-93.6
-50.4

442.0
616.1
-122.6
-121.7
10.9
132.6
-0.9
738.7
285.5
427.9
25.3
-174.2
-126.0
-48.1

12-month percent change in broad money excluding valuation effect

25.4

10.1

29.0

34.8

36.9

32.2

22.2

21.6

19.4

16.1

10.3

12-month percent change of credit to economy excluding valuation effect

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Net credit to central government
Claims on central government
Deposits of the central government
Net credit to state and local governments
Credit to economy
Credit to public nonfinancial corporations
Claims on private sector
Claims on other financial corporations
Other items, net
Capital
Other net assets
Memorandum items:

53.6

30.8

38.8

37.0

30.8

42.7

30.7

21.9

18.2

10.8

9.3

12-month percent change of LGP excluding valuation effect

…

…

30.1

36.9

…

22.2

20.4

16.2

12.4

10.2

8.3

12-month percent change of non-LGP credit excluding valuation effect

…

…

46.2

37.1

…

55.8

35.8

24.2

20.4

10.9

9.6

35.6

18.8

26.2

-34.3

-36.9

3.0

2.5

1.6

4.6

2.5

3.1

17.8
…
70.8
38.9

16.3
41.3
74.1
49.5

18.2
51.8
74.7
51.4

18.4
67.0
65.1
65.1

20.3
…
65.1
64.3

33.3
81.9
61.8
65.0

44.7
99.0
58.3
68.5

57.1
116.5
56.5
68.5

67.8
132.3
55.2
70.9

78.8
147.3
55.7
70.9

88.2
160.8
55.2
72.5

12-month percent change of real credit to economy excluding valuation
effect, end of period
Deposits of the central and local governments in commercial banks at
constant exchange rate
Stock of loans under government programs at constant exchange rate
Dollarization ratio at constant exchange rate
Dollarization ratio at current exchange rates
Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Projections are shown at current exchange rates.

36

Broad money (M3)
Rubel broad money (M2)
Currency in circulation
Domestic currency deposits
Domestic currency securities
Foreign currency deposits
Bank securities in foreign currency
Memo: Total deposits at constant exchange rate

37

Table 6. Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators (Adjustment Scenario), 2008–17
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Consumer prices
End of period
Average
Monetary accounts
Reserve money
Rubel broad money
Growth of credit to the economy excluding valuation
effect
External debt and balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Gross external debt
Public 2/
Private (mostly state-owned-enterprises)
Savings and investment
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
National saving
Government 3/
Nongovernment 3/
Public sector finance
General government balance
Augmented general government balance
Revenue
Expenditure 4/
Of which:
Wages
Subsidies and transfers
Investment
Gross public debt 5/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
Nominal GDP (trillions of rubels)
Terms of trade, percentage change
REER (official exchange rate), percentage change
Official reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
Months of imports of goods and services
Percent of short-term debt

2015

2016

2017

Proj.

Prel.
National accounts
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Consumption
Nongovernment
Government
Investment
Of which: fixed
Net exports 1/

2014

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
10.2
17.8
12.5
16.4
0.3
28.2
23.8
-9.2

0.2
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-2.9
5.0
1.3

7.7
11.2
7.4
9.0
2.3
18.4
17.5
-3.7

5.3
2.9
2.9
3.5
1.0
3.0
11.1
3.8

2.0
0.2
1.2
1.3
1.0
-1.6
-1.5
1.8

2.9
3.0
2.9
3.5
1.0
3.1
3.0
-0.3

4.9
4.5
4.4
5.4
0.5
4.6
4.5
0.0

5.3
5.3
5.5
6.7
0.5
5.2
5.0
-0.5

5.7
5.7
5.7
6.9
0.5
5.7
5.5
-0.4

6.0
6.0
5.9
7.1
0.5
6.2
6.0
-0.5

13.3
14.8

10.1
13.0

9.9
7.7

108.7
53.2

19.1
55.7

11.3
15.8

7.5
9.3

6.0
6.7

5.8
5.9

5.5
5.6

11.7
22.5

-11.5
0.9

49.5
27.4

84.1
64.1

14.9
26.4

16.1
16.1

14.2
14.3

12.3
12.4

11.8
11.9

11.6
11.6

53.6

30.8

38.8

37.0

19.9

12.9

9.2

7.0

7.5

6.1

(Percent of GDP)
-8.2
-10.3
54.0
-64.3
25.0
6.8
18.1

-12.6
-14.1
43.4
-57.5
45.6
18.9
26.7

-15.0
-16.4
46.0
-62.4
51.1
21.6
29.5

-10.5
-6.7
75.1
-81.8
61.4
27.8
33.6

-3.6
0.6
82.9
-82.3
62.3
26.2
36.1

-3.6
-0.8
82.0
-82.8
61.8
25.8
35.9

-3.4
-1.2
81.2
-82.4
61.3
24.0
37.3

-3.4
-1.9
79.4
-81.3
60.8
23.1
37.7

-3.2
-2.4
78.0
-80.4
60.2
22.8
37.4

-2.9
-2.6
76.7
-79.3
58.4
22.2
36.2

37.6
10.0
27.6
29.4
6.5
23.0

37.3
8.1
29.2
24.7
7.4
17.3

41.2
8.3
32.9
26.2
4.0
22.2

36.3
5.5
30.8
25.8
2.5
23.3

33.8
5.7
28.1
30.2
3.6
26.6

34.0
6.2
27.9
30.4
3.5
27.0

33.8
6.2
27.6
30.4
3.1
27.3

33.7
6.3
27.4
30.3
2.9
27.4

33.5
6.4
27.1
30.3
3.0
27.4

33.4
6.5
26.9
30.4
2.9
27.5

1.3
-3.5
50.6
54.1

-0.7
-0.7
45.7
46.4

-1.8
-4.3
41.6
45.9

3.1
-3.0
42.0
45.0

0.0
-2.1
38.6
40.7

-0.6
-2.7
39.2
41.9

-1.0
-3.1
39.0
42.1

-1.3
-3.4
38.7
42.1

-1.3
-3.4
38.4
41.9

-1.5
-3.6
38.2
41.7

6.6
11.5
10.0
21.7

6.7
11.7
8.1
34.9

7.0
8.3
8.3
41.0

6.8
7.8
5.5
50.6

6.5
7.1
5.7
39.6

6.8
7.4
6.2
37.2

6.8
7.4
6.2
34.1

6.8
7.2
6.3
32.2

6.8
7.0
6.4
31.0

6.8
6.9
6.5
29.5

60.8
129.8
8.8
1.6
3.1
1.2
40.4

49.2
137.4
-10.3
-4.5
5.7
1.8
63.2

55.2
164.5
0.5
-5.0
5.0
1.2
42.0

55.1
274.3
5.9
-11.7
7.9
1.9
56.9

…
465.7
7.2
-9.1
8.0
1.8
57.4

…
547.1
-0.6
0.0
10.0
2.1
69.3

…
618.3
-0.9
0.0
12.0
2.4
80.0

…
686.7
-0.4
0.0
14.0
2.7
88.8

…
761.2
-0.3
0.0
17.0
3.0
102.5

…
849.6
0.2
0.0
20.0
3.3
114.8

Quota (2010): SDR 386.4 million (589.7 million U.S. dollars)
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Gross consolidated external debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).
3/ The reduction in government saving and a corresponding increase in nongovernment saving include bank recapitalization and layouts related to public guaranteed
debt in amount of 2.5 percent of GDP in 2010 and 6.1 percent of GDP in 2011.
4/ Refers to the augmented expenditure of the general government.
5/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).

38

Table 7. Belarus: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2007–11
2007

CPI inflation (end year)

2008

2009

2010

2011

12.1

13.3

10.1

9.9

108.7

Export volume of goods (percent change)
Import volume of goods (percent change)

5.2
7.2

1.5
14.3

-11.5
-12.6

2.8
8.0

29.5
15.8

Current account balance (percent of GDP)

-6.7

-8.2

-12.6

-15.0

-10.5

Capital and financial account balance (millions of U.S. dollars)
Of which
Foreign direct investment, net
Trade credits, net
Official Liabilities, net
Liabilties of the banking sector, net
Non-bank private liabilities (excl. trade credits) 1/

5,353

4,287

5,066

6,444

4,771

1,790
690
2,010
1,075
860

2,150
289
1,241
531
315

1,782
657
4,739
483
349

1,352
568
1,975
2,296
39

3,928
561
2,185
474
839

Gross official reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
Months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of broad money

4,182
1.2
19.2

3,061
1.2
11.2

5,653
1.8
22.7

5,031
1.2
16.3

7,916
1.9
59.4

Gross total external debt (millions U.S. dollars)
Percent of GDP
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services

11,995
26.5
43.4

15,168
25.0
40.9

22,439
45.6
90.2

28,202
51.1
94.3

33,881
61.4
72.6

7,365
61
176

7,571
50
247

9,342
42
165

12,170
43
242

14,113
42
178

Debt service ratio (percent) 2/
REER appreciation (CPI based, period average)

3.1
-3.9

4.1
1.6

5.9
-4.5

6.0
-5.0

5.7
-17.8

Capital adequacy ratio (percent) 3/
Nonperforming loans (percent of total)
Banks' net open FX position (percent of regulatory capital) 4/

19.3
0.7
-3.0

21.8
1.7
8.5

19.8
4.2
-11.6

20.5
3.5
-1.4

24.7
4.2
2.2

Real broad money at constant exchange rates (percent change) 5/
Real credit to economy at constant exchange rate (percent change) 5/

29.5
37.0

13.3
22.7

7.9
6.8

18.2
12.6

-42.6
-38.1

Gross short-term external debt (millions of U.S. dollars)
Percent of gross total external debt
Percent of gross official reserves

Sources: Belarus authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes loans, currency and deposits and other flows.
2/ Interest plus medium- and long-term debt repayments in percent of exports of goods and services.
3/ Regulatory capital in percent of risk-weighted assets.
4/ 2011 column shows the value as of September 2011.
5/ Deflated by the CPI.

39
Table 8. Belarus: Capacity to Repay the Fund (Baseline Scenario), 2009–17 1/
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Fund repurchases and charges
Millions of SDRs
Millions of U.S. dollars
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of total debt service 2/
Percent of quota
Percent of gross international reserves

8
13
0.1
0.9
2.1
0.2

43
67
0.2
3.6
11.2
1.3

55
85
0.2
3.2
14.1
1.1

295
456
0.9
8.5
76.4
8.3

1,113
1,718
3.2
30.5
288.1
35.8

893
1,378
2.4
25.9
231.1
42.7

55
85
0.1
1.6
14.3
3.4

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Fund credit outstanding
Millions of SDRs
Millions of U.S. dollars
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of quota
Percent of gross international reserves

1,832
2,898
11.7
474.0
51.3

2,270
3,485
11.7
587.3
69.3

2,270
3,509
7.5
587.3
44.3

2,021
3,119
6.1
522.9
56.5

941
1,452
2.7
243.4
30.2

55
84
0.1
14.2
2.6

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

24,865

29,906

46,670

51,350

54,437

57,212

59,920

63,207

67,303

1,479
386
611
5,653
0
1.543
1.582

1,848
386
593
5,031
0
1.526
1.536

2,658
386
597
7,916
0
1.579
1.546

5,386
386
596
5,520
0
1.543
1.543

5,629
386
596
4,799
0
1.544
1.543

5,319
386
596
3,224
0
1.543
1.543

5,435
386
596
2,533
0
1.542
1.542

4,562
386
595
2,944
0
1.541
1.540

5,202
386
594
3,309
0
1.539
1.538

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and nonfactor services (millions of
U.S. dollars)
Debt service (millions of U.S. dollars)
Quota (millions of SDRs)
Quota (millions of U.S. dollars at eop exchange rate)
Gross international reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
Financing gap (millions of U.S. dollars)
U.S. dollars per SDR (period average)
U.S. dollars per SDR (eop)
Source: IMF staff calculations.

1/ Assumes repurchases are made on obligations schedule.
2/ Debt service includes interest on the entire debt stock and amortization of medium-and long-term debt.

Appendix I. Table 1. Belarus: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007–17
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2007

2008

2009

Projections 1/
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest current
account 7/

2017

Baseline: external debt

26.5

25.0

45.6

51.1

61.4

60.4

59.5

57.3

56.6

56.3

55.7

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 3/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 4/

9.0
-0.1
6.1
6.2
61.0
67.2
-3.6
-2.6
0.6
-1.2
-2.0
9.1

-1.5
-1.8
7.4
7.6
61.0
68.6
-3.3
-5.9
0.8
-2.0
-4.7
0.3

20.6
14.9
11.5
11.3
50.5
61.8
-3.5
6.9
1.0
-0.1
5.9
5.7

5.5
7.7
13.9
13.5
54.2
67.7
-2.3
-3.8
1.1
-3.1
-1.8
-2.2

10.4
3.8
8.7
3.0
84.6
87.6
-6.7
1.9
1.8
-2.7
2.8
6.6

-1.1
1.1
3.1
-1.9
89.5
87.6
-3.4
1.3
3.1
-1.8

-0.9
0.9
4.2
-0.3
88.8
88.5
-3.8
0.5
2.4
-1.9

-2.2
0.0
4.4
0.1
88.3
88.5
-3.9
-0.5
2.0
-2.5

-0.7
-0.4
4.2
0.6
86.9
87.5
-4.0
-0.7
1.9
-2.6

-0.3
-0.8
4.4
1.2
85.8
86.9
-4.2
-0.9
1.7
-2.6

-0.6
-0.7
4.2
1.3
85.0
86.3
-4.1
-0.8
1.8
-2.6

External debt-to-exports ratio (percent)

43.4

40.9

90.2

94.3

72.6

67.4

67.0

64.9

65.2

65.6

65.5

Gross external financing need (billions of U.S. dollars) 5/
Percent of GDP

8.0
17.7

13.4
22.0

14.7
29.9

18.8
34.0

19.6
35.6

21.3
37.1

22.6
36.8

23.2
35.8

24.0
34.9

24.1
32.7

25.2
31.8

60.4

56.6

51.9

49.4

47.8

46.2

3.0
1.0
5.2
10.0
4.0
-3.1
3.4

3.4
3.3
4.3
6.0
7.9
-4.2
3.8

4.4
1.2
3.5
5.1
5.6
-4.4
3.9

4.8
1.6
3.5
4.7
5.4
-4.2
4.0

4.9
1.8
3.2
5.5
6.1
-4.4
4.2

5.0
2.4
3.4
6.5
6.7
-4.2
4.1

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 6/

…

-2.1

…

-1.8

…

-2.2

…

-0.3

…

0.5

…

-6.2

0.1

-8.1

Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollars (percent change)
Nominal external interest rate (percent)
Growth of exports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Growth of imports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

8.6
12.7
4.0
24.2
28.0
-6.1
3.6

10.2
21.7
4.3
34.2
37.0
-7.4
3.3

0.2
-19.1
3.3
-32.9
-27.0
-11.5
3.5

7.7
4.2
2.8
20.3
22.8
-13.9
2.3

5.3
-5.2
3.5
56.1
29.3
-8.7
6.7

1/ Projections are shown at the official exchange rate.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value
of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
3/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
4/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
5/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
6/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels of the last projection year.

40

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline

41
Appendix I. Figure 1. Belarus: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of the
Baseline Scenario 1/ (External debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

80

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

70

50

Baseline
Historical

40

60

46

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

70

Interest
rate shock 57

60

Baseline

56

50

70

56

50
40
20

30

2009

2011

2013

10
2017

2015

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

70

70

Growth
shock

60

59

Baseline

50

56

60
50

40

30
20
2007

80

2009

2011

40

30
20
2007

2009

2011

Baseline:

4.5

Scenario:

2.9

Historical:

7.5

2013

2015

30
20
2017

Combined Shock 2/

70

Combined
shock

70
60

Baseline

50

56

3.6
4.0

Historical:

3.0

2013

30
20
2017

2015

80

Current
account
shock

70

70
67

60

40
30
20
2007

56

Baseline

Baseline:

-4.3

Scenario:

-6.7

Historical:
2009

2011

2013

2015

30 %
depreciation

30

-5.8

20
2017

100
91

80

80

60

60
40

30

30

2009

2011

2013

2015

50

50

40

20
2007

60

40

Real Depreciation Shock 3/

100

64

60

Baseline:
Scenario:

Noninterest Current Account Shock
(Percent of GDP)

50
40

50

30

40

20
2007

60

20
2017

Baseline

56

40

20
2007

40

2009

2011

2013

2015

20
2017

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown. Projections are shown at the official exchange rate.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2012.

Appendix I. Table 2. Belarus: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007–17
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2007

2008

2009

Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

21.7
6.8

34.9
18.9

41.0
21.6

50.6
27.8

37.7
25.1

33.6
24.5

29.0
21.9

26.9
20.9

25.8
20.7

24.8
20.2

10.1
-13.9
-11.0
49.5
38.5
-1.0
-1.0
-0.5
-0.6
0.0
-1.9
-2.6
0.0
0.7
24.0

3.4
-14.7
-14.5
50.6
36.1
-4.1
-4.0
-2.6
-1.4
0.0
3.9
-1.0
0.0
4.9
18.0

13.1
0.2
-0.1
45.7
45.6
1.7
-0.4
-0.4
0.0
2.1
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
0.0
12.9

6.1
-0.9
1.1
41.6
42.7
-3.9
-5.1
-2.8
-2.3
1.2
1.9
-0.6
0.0
2.5
7.0

9.5
3.7
-4.3
42.0
37.7
9.3
-15.2
-13.9
-1.3
24.6
-1.3
-7.4
0.0
6.1
5.8

-12.8
-22.6
-2.1
39.2
37.1
-20.4
-20.4
-19.6
-0.8
...
-0.1
-1.6
0.0
1.5
9.8

-4.1
-10.4
-1.4
39.2
37.7
-8.6
-8.6
-7.7
-0.9
...
-0.3
-1.8
0.0
1.5
6.3

-4.6
-6.7
-1.0
38.9
37.9
-5.4
-5.4
-4.2
-1.2
...
-0.4
-1.9
0.0
1.5
2.0

-2.1
-4.0
-0.6
38.5
37.9
-3.1
-3.1
-1.9
-1.2
...
-0.4
-1.9
0.0
1.5
1.9

-1.0
-2.6
-0.3
38.4
38.0
-1.8
-1.8
-0.6
-1.2
...
-0.5
-2.0
0.0
1.5
1.6

-1.0
-1.6
0.0
38.1
38.1
-1.3
-1.3
-0.1
-1.2
...
-0.4
-1.9
0.0
1.5
0.6

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

37.1

42.9

76.4

98.6

120.4

96.2

85.9

74.6

69.7

67.4

65.2

Gross financing need 6/
Billions of U.S. dollars

-0.8
-0.4

0.3
0.2

1.1
0.5

5.0
2.7

5.1
2.8

8.5
4.9

7.0
4.3

7.2
4.6

7.2
5.0

5.3
3.9

5.4
4.3

37.7
37.7

30.7
28.7

23.6
25.0

18.6
19.8

15.2
18.1

11.1
13.3

3.0
7.6
-67.7
...
75.3
1.6
-2.1

3.4
6.7
-27.1
...
33.9
5.2
-1.4

4.4
7.2
-14.9
...
22.1
4.9
-1.0

4.8
7.8
-7.1
...
14.9
4.9
-0.6

4.9
7.1
-2.2
...
9.2
5.2
-0.3

5.0
6.2
-0.3
...
6.5
5.3
0.0

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
Of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2011–16

0.3

42

18.3
6.5

Baseline: public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated

Debt-stabilizing
primary balance
9/

-0.2
-0.6

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, percent)
Primary deficit

8.6
7.2
-5.6
0.3
12.8
6.9
-11.0

10.2
4.2
-17.0
0.5
21.2
3.7
-14.5

0.2
3.8
-1.9
-23.5
5.7
26.5
-0.1

7.7
2.3
-8.8
-6.9
11.1
1.0
1.1

5.3
4.9
-53.4
-64.1
58.3
-6.9
-4.3

1/ Gross debt of general government (including guarantees) and of monetary authorities.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency denominated debt; and e
= nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

43
Appendix I. Figure 2. Belarus: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of
Baseline Scenario 1/ (Public debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

70

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

60

12
10

Baseline

Historical

50

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

60
50

50

8

Interest
rate shock

40

40
6
30
25

20

11

10

4
2

60

30

37

30

Baseline
Baseline: -10.3

20

Scenario:

-2.3

40

25

20

Historical: -18.4
0
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

0
2017

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

60
50
40

Growth
shock

30

36

Baseline

20
10
2007

2009

2011

Baseline:

4.5

Scenario:

2.9

Historical:

7.5

2013

25

2015

60
50

Combined
shock

40

Baseline

10
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

2009

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

2013

2015

25

No policy
change

10
2007

60

Primary
balance
shock

50
38

40
30

Baseline:

0.7

Scenario:

-2.2

Historical:

2.5

25
Baseline

20

13
2009

2011

2013

2015

10
2017

Real Depreciation and
Contingent Liabilities Shocks 3/

60

Contingent
liabilities
shock
30 %
depreciation

40
33
Baseline

10
2017

10
2017

Primary balance shock (percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario

20
10
2007

2011

39

30
20

60

10
2017

Combined Shock 2/

10
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

25

50
40
30
20

10
2017

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2012 with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

44
APPENDIX II: RISK ASSESSMENT MATRIX
Nature/Source of Main
Threats

1. Loosening of
macroeconomic policies
to achieve growth targets.

2. An external shock in
case of intensification of
the euro zone crisis.

3. Substantial reduction
in non-official external
debt rollover rates.

4. Weakening bank
profitability.

5. Increase in price of gas
and oil imported from
Russia.

Overall Level of Concern
Likelihood of Severe Realization of
Expected Impact if Threat is Realized
(high, medium, low)
Threat in the Next 1-3 Years
(high, medium, low)
High
High
The authorities could loosen policies
Loosening of domestic demand policies
(increase wages and/or increase credit
will lead to significant pressures on the
growth) in the attempt to accelerate
exchange rate and will result in either
economic growth.
loss of reserves (if the authorities resist
the depreciation) or a resurgence of
inflation (if they allow flexible exchange
rate).
Medium
Medium
An intensification of the euro zone
Belarus does not have sufficient buffers
crisis would produce a spillover effect to protect itself from an external shock:
on Belarus along both trade and
the level of reserves is low and gross
financial channels.
financing need is high. The effect would
depend on the extent to which Russia is
affected by the euro area crisis.
Low to Medium
Medium
A worsening of the economic
As about a half of banks’ external debt is
conditions in Belarus and/or in Russia
short-term (on the residual maturity
or an increase in global risk aversion
basis) and the reserves buffer is low, a
could trigger a reduction of the
reduction in the rollover rates would
rollover rates of non-official external
imply strong pressures on the exchange
debt.
rate.
Low to Medium
Medium
Slowdown in economic activity could
Bank recapitalization costs could be
increase NPLs and require bank
significant (in the past, they ranged
recapitalization.
between 1 and 5 percent of GDP).
Low to Medium
Russia could increase domestic price
of natural gas, which will increase
price of gas for Belarus. In the medium
term, the agreement could be
renegotiated.

Medium
As the Belarusian economy is highly
dependent on Russian gas, a substantial
increase of gas prices would increase
gross financing needs. The magnitude of
the impact would depend on the pace of
gas price increases.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Staff Report for the 2012 Article IV Consultation
and Second Post-Program Monitoring Discussions—Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department in Consultation with
Other Departments and the World Bank
April 18, 2012

Contents

Page

I.

Fund Relations .............................................................................................................2

II.

World Bank Relations ..................................................................................................6

III.

Statistical Issues .........................................................................................................11

2
ANNEX I. BELARUS: FUND RELATIONS
As of March 31, 2012
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 10, 1992; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR million

Percent of Quota

386.40
2,655.92
0.02

100.00
687.35
0.01

SDR million

Percent of Allocation

368.64
369.03

100.00
100.11

SDR Million

Percent of Quota

2,269.52

587.35

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-By Arrangements

V.

VI.

Financial Arrangements:
Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount Approved
(SDR million)

Amount Drawn
(SDR million)

Stand-By
Stand-By

01/12/2009
09/12/1995

03/30/2010
09/11/1996

2,269.52
196.28

2,269.52
50.00

Projected Payments to the Fund1/ (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2012
248.92
34.37
283.28

2013
1,080.02
33.31
1,113.32

Forthcoming
2014
885.84
6.98
892.82

2015
54.74
0.46
55.20

2016
0.00
0.00
0.00

1/ When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such arrears
will be shown in this section.

VII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Voluntary (non-program related) assessment of the NBRB was completed in April 2004. The
assessment concluded that significant vulnerabilities existed in the safeguards framework,
especially in the areas of the legal structure and independence, external and internal audit,
and in financial reporting. The assessment made specific recommendations to correct the
identified shortcomings.
An update assessment of the NBRB, which was completed in May 2009 in connection with
the Stand-By Arrangement approved on January 12, 2009, found little progress in addressing
previously identified vulnerabilities. The assessment determined that risks have increased
since the voluntary 2004 assessment and recommended the following measures:

3







Adopting a new law that provides operational and financial independence for the
NBRB to ensure the effectiveness of the NBRB’s internal and external audit
mechanisms and the control systems,
Conducting special audits of NIR and NDA data to reduce the risk of misreporting,
Divesting the NBRB’s investment in non-financial subsidiaries, and
Publishing the audited IFRS financial statements.

The NBRB implemented only some of the recommendations. Special audits of NIR and
NDA data for March, June, September and December 2009 test dates were completed. The
NBRB divested most of its non-financial subsidiaries in 2011. In the first half of 2011 the
NBRB increased involvement in quasi-fiscal activities by purchasing bonds of local banks at
higher than market prices, however, in the second half of 2011 this activity had ceased and
the accumulated stock of securities was transferred to the Development Bank in
December 2011.
VIII. Exchange Arrangements:
The currency of Belarus is the rubel, which was introduced in 1994.
The de jure exchange rate regime is managed float. The NBRB has been officially pegging
the rubel against a basket of currencies, including the U.S. dollar, the euro and the Russian
ruble within horizontal bands from January 2 2009, although the rubel has remained in a
2 percent band from May 2010 through April 2011 vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, during which
time the de facto exchange rate arrangement was classified as a stabilized arrangement.
Following substantial loss of reserves in Q1 2011, the NBRB ceased interventions and a
heavily depreciated black market exchange rate emerged. The NBRB devalued the official
exchange rate in May of 2011 but the parallel exchange market persisted, giving rise to a
multiple exchange rate system. On October 20, 2011 the NBRB unified the exchange rates at
the market rate by introducing a single trading session, abolished the official exchange rate
bands and announced introduction of a managed floating regime. Since then, the NBRB has
been using official exchange interventions sparingly to smooth excessive fluctuations.
Therefore, the de facto exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified to other managed
arrangement from a stabilized arrangement, effective October 20, 2011.
Belarus accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the IMF’s Articles of
Agreement on November 5, 2001. Following the unification of the exchange
rates in October, 2011, the authorities lifted some of earlier introduced the administrative
controls, including the ban on the purchase of foreign exchange for certain import payments
in excess of 50 thousand Euros. However, based on currently available information, Belarus
continues to maintain restrictions on the availability of foreign exchange for advance
payments for imports. Staff is currently reviewing the jurisdictional implications of the new
regime and the remaining FX controls.

4

IX.

UFR/Article IV Consultation:

Belarus is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation was concluded
on March 4, 2011 and a report was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr1166.pdf


Article IV discussions took place from February 22nd to March 6th 2012. A staff
team comprising Messrs. Jarvis (head), Kovtun, Saksonovs and Ms. Lis (all EUR),
Messrs. Bibolov (MCM), Forni (FAD), and Sasaki (SPR) visited Minsk during
February 22nd – March 6th, 2012. The team met with the Prime Minister,
Mr. Miasnikovich; the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Rumas; the Governor of the
National Bank of the Republic of Belarus, Ms. Yermakova; the Minister of Finance,
Mr. Kharkovetz; the Minister of Economy, Mr. Snopkov; the Deputy Head of the
Presidential Administration, Mr.Tur and other senior officials. Ms. Koliadina, the
Resident Representative, assisted the mission. Mr. Allen (Senior Resident
Representative for Central and Eastern Europe) and Mr. Prader (OED) joined the
concluding discussions.

Stand-By Arrangement. A 15-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of
SDR 1.6 billion (US$2.5 billion, 418.8 percent of quota) was approved by the Executive
Board (EBS/09/1) on January 12, 2009. An augmentation of the SBA was approved on
June 29, 2009 in conjunction with the completion of the first review (EBS/09/99), bringing
the Fund’s financial support to SDR 2.3 billion (US$3.5 billion, 587.3 percent of quota). The
final review was completed on March 26, 2010. Total disbursements under the program
amounted to SDR 2.3 billion (US$3.5 billion).
X.

FSAP Participation, ROSCs, and OFC Assessments:

Two FSAP missions took place in 2004 and an FSSA report was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18367.0.
The detailed assessment reports were disseminated in May 2006 for the Basel Core
Principles for Effective Banking Supervision on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19246.0, for the Transparency of
Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19248.0, and the Technical Note Deposit Insurance on http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19250.0.
The Detailed Assessment Report on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing
of Terrorism was published in June 2007 (IMF Country Report No. 07/190,
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=21030.0)
An FSAP update mission took place in September 2008. An FSSA update report was
published in January 2009 (IMF Country Report No 09/30,
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=22656.0)

5
The fiscal ROSC was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=17839.0 and the data ROSC on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18013.0.
XI.

Technical Assistance, 2006–12:
Department
Counterpart
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM

Subject
Bank Supervision
TA on Development Bank
Bank Supervision
Risk Based Supervision
Banking supervision: on-site inspections
Banking Supervision: early warning system, risk
management
Strengthening central bank autonomy
NBRB refinancing of banks
Banking regulation: loan classification and provisioning
Monetary policy: forecasting and policy analysis
Exchange rate regime, foreign exchange operations
FSAP Update
Financial stability and external debt management
Banking supervision: financial stability issues, stresstesting

MCM

Timing
February-March 2012
October-November 2011
October 2011
April 2011
September 2010
March -April 2010
March 2010
November 2009
April 2009
February-March 2009
December 2008
September 2008
January 2008
July 2007

MCM
MCM
MCM

Strengthening forecasting and policy analysis
Banking supervision: on-site inspection
Banking supervision: stress-testing, financial stability

June 2008
October 2007
July 2007
May 2007
April 2007
March 2007

MCM
MCM

Insurance supervision
Monetary policies analysis and forecasting

March 2007
February 2007

MCM
MCM
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD

Banking supervision: on-site inspection
Improving monetary policy
Social Safety Nets
Program budgeting and medium-term framework
Tax administration
Tax policy
Expenditure rationalization
Tax system reform
Introduction of a medium-term fiscal framework (MTF)
Program budgeting reform implementation

FAD
STA
STA
STA
STA
STA

Fiscal diagnostic mission
Multitopic Statistics Mission
National accounts statistics
Balance of payments and external sector statistics
Government finance statistics
National accounts statistics

January 2007
January 2007
November 2011
March-April 2011
September 2010
April 2010
March 2010
October 2009
March-April 2009
March 2008
November 2007
May 2007
September 2006
October -November 2010
January 2008
January 2008
September-October 2007
October 2006

Building a system for forecasting and policy analysis

6
ANNEX II. BELARUS: WORLD BANK RELATIONS
The World Bank Group Strategy
1.
The World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy provides for a selective presence
to support structural reforms and buttress the Government’s programs of improving energy
efficiency, water supply quality, waste management, road upgrading, and developing
infrastructure in Chernobyl-affected areas. Analytic and advisory work comprises a core
element of the program. Belarus is currently receiving World Bank financing for 5
infrastructure projects. To date, the Bank lending commitments in Belarus total
US$865 million, with US$22.8 million provided as grants.
2.
The IFC strategy aims at providing advisory services and investment operations to
foster private sector development. IFC’s advisory services under the Belarus Regulatory
Simplification and Investment Generation Program (August 2010–March 2013) focus on
improvement of the business environment and investment climate, particularly regulatory
simplification related to business operations, as well as on building government capacity for
investment promotion. IFC’s recently launched Belarus Food Safety Improvement advisory
project endeavours to increase the competitiveness of Belarusian food producers by
improving their food safety practices, raising awareness and facilitating wider
implementation of best international food safety management practices. To date, the IFC
investment commitments in Belarus total approximately US$300 million; divided almost
equally between financial markets and the real sector. IFC’s investments will continue to
focus on financial markets, general manufacturing, climate change and agribusiness.
IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
3.
The Bank and the Fund teams work closely in planning and delivering their
assistance. The IMF plays a key role in regards to macro-economic policy, while the World
Bank focuses on the structural agenda, macro-fiscal, energy efficiency, social and
environmental issues.
Areas in Which the World Bank Leads
4.
Structural reforms and private business development. A new Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) –the Bank’s key analytical product –is delivered in FY2012. The CEM
focuses on understanding the sources of growth, the needed economic and structural
rebalancing and identifying the untapped potential for the medium-term economic
development of Belarus. Through the Trust Fund for Privatization (US$ 5 million) the Bank
provides technical advice to prepare and test a new approach to privatization which would
lead to improved governance, productivity and competitiveness of privatized companies. The
IFC delivers an active advisory program around challenges facing the private sector and
international “best practices” for improving the business regulatory environment.

7
5.
Increasing efficiency of public spending and social issues. In FY 2011 the World
Bank presented the first volume of the Programmatic Public Expenditure Review (PER-1),
focused on providing policy advice in the areas of pensions, social assistance, housing and
communal services, and subsidies in the agriculture sector. The second volume of the review
(PER-2) will be delivered in FY13. PER-2 will identify options to achieve efficiency gains in
the areas of intergovernmental fiscal relations, education and health spending. PER-2 will
consolidate fiscal reform options identified in both phases, quantify the fiscal, and where
possible the social impact, of proposed measures and integrate them into a consistent macroeconomic framework.
6.
Energy sector and transport infrastructure development. Currently, two energy
efficiency lending operations are being implemented in Belarus with World Bank’s financial
support: Additional Financing Loan for the Post Chernobyl Recovery Project
(US$30 million) and the Energy Efficiency Project (EEP) (US$125 million). In addition, a
TA project is currently under implementation, looking at existing legislation on renewable
energy, barriers and options for increased use of biomass energy for heat production and
energy efficiency, as well as opportunities to increase private sector participation in the
district heating sector. A Road Upgrading and Modernization project (US$ 150 million) has
been approved by the Board on November 11, 2010, and became effective in January 2011.
7.
Agriculture and forestry sector. Through an IDF Grant the Bank supports
strengthening of the institutional capacity for monitoring and evaluation of agricultural
policy instruments. The EU ENPI-FLEG program implemented by the World Bank in
partnership with the IUCN is targeted at improving forestry sector governance and combating
illegal logging and associated trade and corruption. A Forestry Sector Policy Note which is
currently under preparation will inform and influence Belarusian forest policy by providing
strategic advice on sector policy objectives, aims, and opportunities supporting the
development of the Forest Strategic Plan.
8.
Environment. The Bank supports Belarus’ efforts in strengthening its environment
institutions, addressing key public health challenges, and complying with its international
commitments. Environmental pollution issues are addressed through the GEF Grant Project
(US$5 million) for Persistent Organic Pollutant (POPs) Stockpile Management and
Technical/Institutional Capacity Upgrading. Progress is being made towards achieving
improved water, wastewater and solid waste management services under the Water Supply
and Sanitation Project (US$60 million) and the Solid Waste Management Project
(US$42.5 million).
Areas of Shared Responsibility
9.
Macroeconomic development. The two institutions discuss and consult with each
other in the preparation of the macroeconomic framework and debt sustainability analysis, as
well as in the preparation of analytical pieces on macro-growth issues.

8
10.
Public expenditure management. The Bank, jointly with the Fund, has been
working on rationalizing expenditures and reforming the budget process. The Bank provides
technical assistance, training and key advisory services aimed at strengthening medium-term
fiscal planning processes and supporting the introduction of output based financing
arrangements in education and health sectors under its Strengthening Accountability and the
Fiduciary Environment (SAFE) grant.
11.
Debt management. The Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) was
completed in FY11. The Reform Plan Report for Belarus building on the findings of the
DeMPA mission was prepared in FY12. In FY12-13, the Bank, jointly with the IMF will
provide assistance in developing a medium-term debt strategy (MTDS) in Belarus.
12.
Financial sector. The Bank conducts financial sector monitoring and policy dialogue
jointly with the IMF. Under the FIRST grant the Bank provided TA for securities market
development in FY11–12.
Areas in Which the IMF Leads
13.
The IMF is actively engaged with the authorities in discussing the macroeconomic
framework, providing technical assistance and related support, including support on
economic and financial statistics, tax policy, monetary operations, and fiscal transparency.
The IMF is leading the dialogue on setting the objectives for monetary and exchange rate
policies, overall budget envelope, and tax policy.
14.
The IMF analysis in these areas serves as an input to the Bank policy advice. The
Bank and the IMF teams have regular consultations, and the Bank staff takes part in the IMF
Article IV Consultations. This helps to ensure consistency of policy recommendations by the
two institutions.
15.
Questions may be referred to Connie Luff (Country Program Coordinator,
ECCU2, 202-458-4068) and Marina Bakanova (Senior Country Economist, ECSPE, 37517-2265284).

9
Belarus: Bank and Fund Planned Activities in Macro-Critical Structural Reform Areas
in 2012
Title

Products

Provisional Timing of
Missions
June 2012

Expected Delivery Date

1.Bank Work
Program
(AAA)

Belarus Country Economic
Memorandum
Programmatic Public
Expenditure Review (PER)
- phase 2

Ongoing

September 2012

Belarus Health and
Education Sectors TA

Ongoing

December 2012

TA on Strengthening
Medium-term Fiscal
Planning Process (SAFE
TF)

Ongoing

TA through 2011-2012

Developing Medium-Term
Debt Strategy (MTDS)

June 2012

September 2012

Securities Market
Development TA (FIRST

February 2012

February 2012

Financial Sector
Monitoring and Policy TA

Ongoing

TA through 2010-2013

Privatization TA (Austrian
TF)

Ongoing

TA through 2010-2015

Belarus Labor Force
Survey (TFSCB)

Ongoing

TA through 2011‐2012

TA in environmental
policies and institutions
(grants)

Ongoing

TA through 2010‐2012

TA on Forest Law
Enforcement and
Governance (FLEG)

Ongoing

Forestry Sector Policy
Note

Ongoing

July 2012

Ongoing

TA through 2011‐14

March 2012

TF)

TA on Strengthening
Institutional Capacity for
Monitoring and

TA through 2008‐12

10
Evaluation of Agricultural
Policy Instruments
2.Fund Work
Program

Peripatetic advisor on bank
supervision

Ongoing

External debt management
system TA

September 2012

Inflation targeting TA

October 2012

TA on developing of
capacity and instruments

November 2012

Follow-up TA on progress
of development bank

December 2012

11
ANNEX III. BELARUS— STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of April 18, 2012
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General:
Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance. The most affected
area is external debt data.
National Accounts:
The National Statistics Committee (NSC) compiles and disseminates quarterly and annual GDP
estimates at current and constant prices following the 1993 System of National Accounts. The quality
of the estimates is good, and the timeliness and periodicity exceed the Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) requirements. In addition to the quarterly and annual estimates, a monthly GDP is
compiled 15 days after the end of the reference month. The NSC compiles annually a full set of
accounts (up to the financial accounts), institutional sector accounts, and input-output tables. It has
started the compilation of experimental estimates of regional GDP at current and constant prices –
monthly, quarterly and annual. The accuracy of the source data is good, and the statistical techniques
used are sound. The national accounts estimates are internally consistent, and they are also consistent
with other macroeconomic statistics. All other real sector data are disseminated in accordance with
the SDDS requirements.
Price Statistics:
The CPI covers 31 towns in the country and the PPI covers 1,467 industrial organizations, and they
are published monthly. In addition to the general CPI index, the NSC also publishes indices for
foodstuffs, non-food goods, and services. The CPI is based on weights from 2008. Detailed PPI
weight data are not published.
Government finance statistics:
Government finance statistics are compiled in broad compliance with the recommendations of the
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). Areas that need improvement include
classification of some expenses (e.g. subsidies to corporations, social benefits to households, capital
transfers to corporations); inconsistency between GFS and monetary data; valuation of assets and
liabilities (at nominal or market value); and compilation for public corporations.
Monetary statistics:
Monetary and Financial Statistics are compiled by the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus
(NBRB), broadly following methodology of the IMF’s Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual
(MFSM). Since the last Article IV consultation, the NBRB has implemented most of STA
recommendations regarding monetary statistics
External sector statistics:
The NBRB publishes quarterly balance of payments and international investment position statements
in the BPM5 format and is transitioning to BPM6. Overall the timeliness and serviceability of external
sector data is satisfactory, although there are gaps in external debt data.
II. Data Standards and Quality
A data ROSC report was published on
Belarus subscribed to the Special Data
February 1, 2005.
Dissemination System (SDDS) on
December 22, 2004 and met all SDDS
requirements at the time of subscription.

12
BELARUS: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(As of April 18, 2012)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
7
data

Frequency
of
7
reporting

Frequency
of
7
publication

Exchange Rates

Apr. 2012

04/18/12

D/W/M

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
1
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Feb 2012

04/15/12

D/W/M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Feb. 2012

04/15/11

D/W/M

M

M

Broad Money

Feb. 2012

04/15/11

W/M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Feb. 2012

04/15/11

D/W/M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

Feb. 2012

04/15/11

W/M

M

M

Apr. 2012

04/18/12

D/W/M

D/W/M

D/W/M

Feb. 2012

04/10/12

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – General
4
Government

Q4 2011

01/28/12

Q

Q

Q

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

Feb. 2012

03/28/12

M

M

Q

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Feb. 2012

03/28/12

M

M

Q

Q4 2011

02/29/12

M

M

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Feb. 2012

04/12/12

M

M

Q

GDP/GNP

Mar. 2012

04/12/12

M

M

M/Q

Q4 2011

2/29/12

Q

Q

Q

Q4 2011

2/29/12

Q

Q

Q

Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index

External Current Account Balance

Gross External Debt
International Investment Position
1

6

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
9
soundness

8

Data Quality
Accuracy
10
and reliability

O, O, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

O, LO, O, LO

O, O, LO, LO,
O

LO, LNO, O, O

O, O, O, O,
NO

O, O, LO, LO

LO, O, O, O,
O

O, O, LO, O

LO, LNO, LO,
O, LO

Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign
currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a
foreign currency but settled by other means.
2
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Including external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
These columns should only be included for countries for which Data ROSC (or a Substantive Update) has been published.
9
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published February 1, 2005 and based on the findings of the mission that took place during March 23 to
April 7, 2004 for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively)
concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or
not observed (NO).
10
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source
data, assessment and valid.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 12/50
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 17, 2012

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2012 Article IV Consultation and the
Second Post-Program Monitoring Discussions with Belarus
On May 4, 2012, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation and second Post-Program Monitoring discussions with Belarus. 1
Background
The last year was marked by a severe balance of payments crisis. Unsustainable policies in
late 2010 and the first quarter of 2011 pushed the economy into an inflation-depreciation spiral,
with the 12-month inflation rate accelerating to 109 percent. Despite the slowdown of economic
activity in the second half of 2011, growth remained robust at 5.3 percent.
Since mid-2011 the authorities have been implementing stabilization measures. The National
Bank of the Republic of Belarus has discontinued the practice of providing liquidity at nonmarket terms in June 2011 and gradually increased policy interest rates in the second half of
the year. The authorities unified the exchange rate and introduced a flexible exchange rate
regime in October 2011. The general government fiscal balance showed a surplus of 3 percent
of GDP for the year. These policies have restored foreign exchange markets, reduced inflation
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.
1

(which has fallen to below 2 percent per month in the first quarter of 2012) and improved the
current account deficit. Recently signed oil and gas agreements with Russia have led to a
significant improvement in terms of trade. Official reserves have risen to a level covering 2
months of imports of goods and services following substantial privatization proceeds, two
tranches of a EurAsEC Anti-Crisis Fund loan and a loan from Sberbank.
The financial system has weathered the 2011 crisis and banks’ capital has been replenished
with general budget resources. In 2011, bank recapitalization expenditure amounted to
5 percent of GDP. System-wide non-performing loans increased modestly to slightly over
4 percent at the end of 2011, but are expected to increase further as the economy slows down.
Continued deterioration in asset quality would put pressure on banks’ capital and could call for
new recapitalizations.
The authorities have announced their intention to reduce inflation and lower the current account
deficit and to raise the level of reserves and adjusted policy plans by curtailing plans for lending
under government programs and adopting a balanced budget for 2012. However, they also
announced a 5–5.5 percent GDP growth target and stated their intent to increase dollar wages
significantly.
Structural reforms have been slow, with occasional reversals. Banking sector reform has been
progressing slowly, and little has been done to harden state-owned enterprises’ (SOEs) budget
constraints. Price liberalization was partially reversed in 2011.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the Belarusian economy’s emergence from the 2011 crisis owing
to the authorities’ commendable adjustment policies in the second half of the year, including
exchange rate unification, introduction of a flexible exchange rate, monetary policy tightening,
and expenditure and wage restraint. These policies have restored foreign exchange markets,
reduced inflation and the current account deficit, and helped increase reserves. Given
substantial remaining vulnerabilities and risks, Directors strongly encouraged the authorities to
remain firmly focused on consolidating domestic and external stability and to pursue structural
reforms.
Directors stressed the importance of ensuring consistency between the authorities’ policy goals.
They noted that pursuing high growth and wage targets could re-ignite the inflation-depreciation
spiral and imperil medium-term fiscal and debt sustainability. They called for continued fiscal
restraint and for a disciplined wage policy in the public sector, including SOEs. Keeping a tight
monetary policy stance would also be important to keep inflation in check. It should be
supported by continued exchange rate flexibility and a strong reserve buffer to insulate the
economy from external shocks. In this connection, progress toward implementing the
prerequisites for inflation targeting would boost the credibility of monetary and exchange rate
policies.

Directors emphasized the need to enhance fiscal discipline, noting that limiting quasi-fiscal
operations and rationalizing government spending would improve efficiency and reduce the debt
level over the medium term. They encouraged the authorities to accelerate plans to reduce
general subsidies and improve targeted social assistance and implement civil service and
pension reforms.
Directors underscored the need for strong and carefully sequenced structural reforms to
improve productivity and growth prospects and reduce vulnerabilities over the medium term.
They highlighted the importance of reducing the government’s direct control of the economy,
noting that price liberalization, enterprise reform, and privatization would improve resource
allocation and strengthen market incentives. In the financial sector, a greater role for private
banks would increase efficiency. Relieving state-owned banks of the obligation to undertake
directed lending once the Development Bank becomes fully operational, while ensuring that the
bank is run on prudent and transparent principles, would be important. Directors also called for
further improvements to the business and investment climate.
Directors noted the authorities’ interest in a Fund-supported arrangement. They stressed that a
firm commitment by policymakers at the highest level to a strong and consistent stabilization
and reform strategy would be essential.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2012 Article IV Consultation with Belarus is also available.

Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–12
2008
2009
National accounts
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Consumption
Nongovernment
Government
Investment
Of which: fixed
Net exports 1/
Consumer prices
End of period
Average
Monetary accounts
Rubel broad money
Growth of credit to the economy at constant exchange rates
External debt and balance of payments
Current account
Trade balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Gross external debt
Public 2/
Private (mostly state-owned-enterprises)
Savings and investment
Gross domestic investment
National saving
Public sector finance
General government balance
Augmented general government balance
Revenue
Expenditure 3/
Of which:
Wages
Subsidies and transfers
Investment
Gross public debt

2010

2011
Prel.

2012
Proj.

10.2
17.8
12.5
16.4
0.3
28.2
23.8
-9.2

0.2
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-2.9
5.0
1.3

7.7
11.2
7.4
9.0
2.3
18.4
17.5
-3.7

5.3
2.9
2.9
3.5
1.0
3.0
11.1
3.8

3.0
3.0
3.9
3.8
4.0
1.6
1.5
-0.3

13.3
14.8

10.1
13.0

9.9
7.7

108.7
53.2

38.4
66.0

22.5
39.0

0.9
17.6

27.4
23.7

64.1
29.2

42.8
42.7

-8.2
-10.3
54.0
-64.3
25.0
6.8
18.1

-12.6
-14.1
43.4
-57.5
45.6
18.9
26.7

-15.0
-16.4
46.0
-62.4
51.1
21.6
29.5

-10.5
-6.7
75.1
-81.8
61.4
27.8
33.6

-6.2
-1.9
79.6
-81.5
60.4
25.1
35.2

37.6
29.4

37.3
24.7

41.2
26.2

36.3
25.8

34.9
28.7

1.3
-3.5
50.6
54.1

-0.7
-0.7
45.7
46.4

-1.8
-4.3
41.6
45.9

3.1
-3.0
42.0
45.0

0.0
-2.3
39.2
41.5

6.6
11.5
10.0
21.7

6.7
11.7
8.1
34.9

7.0
8.3
8.3
41.0

6.8
7.8
5.5
50.6

6.7
7.5
5.7
37.7

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
60.8
49.2
55.2
55.1
…
Nominal GDP (trillions of rubels)
129.8
137.4
164.5
274.3
495.2
Terms of trade
8.8
-10.3
0.5
5.9
7.1
Real effective exchange rate
1.6
-4.5
-5.0
-17.8
1.3
Official reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
3.1
5.7
5.0
7.9
5.5
Months of imports of goods and services
1.2
1.8
1.2
1.9
1.2
Percent of short-term debt
40.4
63.2
42.0
56.9
38.9
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed
debt).
3/ Refers to the augmented expenditure of the general government.

