IMF Country Report No. 13/154

GREECE
June 2013

2013 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2013 Article IV consultation with Greece,
the following documents have been released and are included in this package:


Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on April 15, 2013, with the officials of Greece on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on May 20, 2013. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its May 31, 2013 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.


Statement by the Executive Director for Greece.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of
market-sensitive information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

©2013 International Monetary Fund

GREECE
STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2013 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION
May 20, 2013

KEY ISSUES
In the midst of a sharp and socially painful recession, Greece is making important
progress in overcoming deep-seated problems. Progress on fiscal adjustment has been
exceptional by any standard, with the cyclically-adjusted primary balance having
improved cumulatively by about 15 percent of GDP during 2010–12. Labor market
reforms are helping to realign nominal wages and productivity; this internal devaluation
has reduced the competitiveness gap by about half since 2010. And financial stability has
been preserved, notwithstanding public debt restructuring and the recession. This
progress has been facilitated by considerable European and international support.
But Greece is adjusting mainly through recession, not through productivity-enhancing
reforms. Beyond the labor market, broader structural reforms have fallen well short of the
critical mass required to transform the investment climate and boost potential growth.
With fiscal adjustment set to weigh on demand for several more years, growth must
come from private investment and exports. Thus, restoring growth and reducing
unacceptably high unemployment will require full and timely implementation of
ambitious reforms that firmly puts to rest uncertainty about the authorities’ willingness to
tackle vested interests. The key priorities:


Undertaking structural reforms to lower barriers to entry would reduce product prices
and facilitate re-allocation of resources to more productive activities.



Reinforcing the governance framework in the financial sector and reversing the rising
tide of non-performing loans are key to effective financial intermediation.



Broadening the tax base and strengthening revenue and public administration would
improve the quality of adjustment (the burden has fallen excessively on those earning
a salary or pension) and underpin further fiscal effort to reach medium-term targets.



Ensuring that debt sustainability concerns do not continue to weigh on investment
requires timely delivery of Greece’s European partners’ undertakings on debt relief.

The last Article IV consultation was concluded in July 2009. This report focuses on
developments since then and on policies to overcome current challenges.

GREECE

Approved By

Reza Moghadam and
Hugh Bredenkamp

Discussions for the Article IV consultation were held during April 8–15.
The mission met with the Minister of Finance, Governor of the Bank of
Greece, and other Cabinet Ministers; and staff in these and other
ministries. The mission also met private banks, think tanks, and
employer associations. The staff team comprised P. Thomsen (head),
M. Flanagan, W. McGrew, G. Gottlieb, N. Hobdari, W. Maliszewski, and
M. Shamloo (EUR); I. Petrova (FAD); S. Lanau and B. Rayner (SPR);
O. Frecaut, M. Oliva, and D. Monaghan (MCM); and G. Esposito (LEG).
B. Traa, S. Eble, M. Athanasopoulou, G. Gatopoulos, and M. Kalimeri
(IMF resident representative office) assisted the mission. J. Manning
and C. Piatakovas (EUR) assisted from headquarters.

CONTENTS
CONTEXT ............................................................................................................................................ 4
A. Build-Up to the Crisis .................................................................................................................................................. 4
B. Crisis Response .............................................................................................................................................................. 5
C. Developments ................................................................................................................................................................ 7
D. Outlook ......................................................................................................................................................................... 11
POLICY DISCUSSIONS..................................................................................................................... 14
A. Restoring Growth ...................................................................................................................................................... 14
B. Financial Sector: Supporting the Recovery ...................................................................................................... 16
C. Advancing Fiscal Adjustment................................................................................................................................ 19
D. Strategy to Reduce Public Debt .......................................................................................................................... 23
STATISTICS ...................................................................................................................................... 24
STAFF APPRAISAL ........................................................................................................................... 24
BOXES
1. Why Has the Recession In Greece Been So Deep? ....................................................................................... 27
2. External Balance Assessment (EBA) .................................................................................................................... 29
FIGURES
1. Revisions to Macro Projections, 2008–17......................................................................................................... 30
2. Performance Among Peers, 2000–17 ................................................................................................................. 31
3. Labor Market Developments, 2007–12 ............................................................................................................. 32
4. Restoring Growth ....................................................................................................................................................... 33
5. Financial Sector: Supporting the Recovery ...................................................................................................... 34
6. Advancing Fiscal Adjustment ................................................................................................................................ 35

2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

TABLES
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2009–14............................................................................................................ 36
2. Medium-Term Macro Framework, 2012–18 .................................................................................................... 37
3. General Government: Statement of Operations (GFSM 2001, flows), 2010–16 ............................... 38
4. Financial Balance Sheet (GFSM 2001, stocks), 2008–12.............................................................................. 39
5. General Government Operations, 2010–17 ..................................................................................................... 40
6. Summary of Balance of Payments, 2010–18 ................................................................................................... 41
7. Monetary Survey, 2010–14..................................................................................................................................... 42
8. Monetary Financial Institutions (excl. BoG)—Uses and Sources of Funds, 2010–16 ....................... 43
9. Core Set of Financial Soundness Indicators for Deposit Taking Institutions, 2009–12 .................. 44
10. Risk Assessment Matrix......................................................................................................................................... 45
APPENDIX
I. Debt Sustainability Analysis .................................................................................................................................... 46

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

GREECE

CONTEXT
A. Build-Up to the Crisis
1.
Fiscal expansion after euro accession led to a buildup of large economic imbalances. By
2009, both the flow and stock imbalances were among the highest in the euro area: the overall fiscal
and current account balances were in double digits (-15½ and -11 percent of GDP, respectively),
public sector debt reached 115 percent of GDP (revised subsequently to 130 percent of GDP), and
the net international investment position stood at -86 percent of GDP. These imbalances were
largely a result of fiscal expansion that was financed by external borrowing at lower post-euro
accession interest rates. Channeled through transfers, subsidies, and investments, fiscal expansion
lifted private income and consumption, which in turn boosted tax revenues and masked the true size
of the underlying fiscal gap. Lower post-euro accession interest rates also stimulated a private sector
borrowing spree. But private borrowing started from a low level, and private sector liabilities
remained relatively small.
Key Fiscal Indicators
(Percent of GDP)
2001
Primary balance
Revenue
Of which:
Total tax revenue 1/
Primary expenditure
Of which:
Wages
Social benefits

2009

Change

2.0
40.9

-10.5
38.3

-12.5
-2.6

34.4
38.9

32.4
48.8

-2.1
9.9

10.4
15.4

13.4
21.2

3.1
5.8

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes direct taxes, indirect taxes, and social
contributions.

2.
The global financial crisis in 2008 led to a retrenchment of cross-border flows and
unmasked Greece’s underlying fiscal and structural imbalances. In an economy constrained by
some of the most stringent regulations in Europe, the external credit-fueled pre-crisis boom led to
large and persistent structural current account deficits. Imbalances continued to widen,
notwithstanding the Stability and Growth Pact, signaling worsening competitiveness problems. Repricing of risks in 2008, large government debt data revisions, and the deterioration in Greece’s
fiscal balance alerted ratings agencies and the markets to the size of the needed adjustment. As a
result, spreads rose sharply and banks lost access to wholesale funding after sovereign downgrades.

4

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

B. Crisis Response
3.
In response, an ambitious multi-year adjustment program was put in place. The May
2010 EC/ECB/IMF supported program had two broad aims: to make fiscal policy and the fiscal and
debt position sustainable, and to improve competitiveness. Given an overall fiscal deficit of
13½ percent of GDP in 2009 (revised to 15½ percent of GDP shortly after program approval), the
program entailed significant front-loaded fiscal consolidation (with provisions to shield low-income
households from the brunt of the adjustment), in addition to comprehensive structural reforms to
boost productivity and a strategy to backstop the banking system. In this regard, the authorities
were convinced when the program was put in place that Greece’s large potential for catch-up gains
in productivity—together with the expectation that the crisis would mobilize broad political support
for comprehensive structural reforms to unlock this potential—meant that direct measures to force
down wages and achieve accelerated internal devaluation would not be necessary.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

GREECE

4.
Growth underperformed considerably. Although nominal GDP was from the outset
assumed to contract substantially in 2011–12, actual performance was worse than projected. Several
adverse and mutually reinforcing factors combined to undermine investor sentiments during this
period, of which the following stand out:


Bouts of political turmoil left increasing doubts about support for reforms. The program
was from the outset not supported by all mainstream parties and increasing opposition began
to emerge from inside the governing party in early 2011. A government reshuffle in mid-2011,
followed by an aborted attempt at galvanizing public support through a referendum, failed to
mobilize broader political support. Such support was only achieved after the Cannes Summit in
November 2011, when European leaders explicitly raised the euro exit option, prompting the
two main political parties to support a technocratic interim government. By then, however, the
deep recession had already seriously undermined public support, and the two parties’ share of
the vote in two rounds of elections in early 2012 fell from 80 to 42 percent. At present, the
program is supported only by a slim majority of pro-program parties in a fragile coalition.



Structural reforms stalled. Against a backdrop of political turmoil, vested interests opposed to
reforms were increasingly emboldened. After a strong start in 2010, and aside from labor market
reforms in early 2012 by the technocratic interim government, reforms were hesitant and
piecemeal, falling well short of the critical mass needed to transform the investment climate.



Investors were unsettled by increasing uncertainty about the external financing strategy.
In a reversal of the initial strategy, key euro area member states started calling for a bail-in of
investors at the Deauville Summit in October 2010. The reduction in spreads achieved during the
previous months was quickly lost, and by the time consensus among Greece’s European partners
had shifted firmly in favor of a PSI one year later, spreads had risen to near default levels.



Debt sustainability concerns were increasing. Under the program’s baseline in May 2010,
public debt-to-GDP was expected to increase dramatically—peaking at about 155–160 percent
(including an expected data revision)—as a result of the contraction in nominal GDP. In the
event, the much deeper-than-expected recession caused an even sharper increase in the debt
ratio, and debt sustainability concerns were increasingly weighing on sentiment.

These mutually reinforcing factors contributed to a steady deterioration in investor sentiment and a
large outflow of deposits, especially as the increasing doubts about political support for the
program gradually raised the specter of euro exit. The assumed recovery in the investment climate
failed to take hold. Instead, a continued contraction in investment amplified the negative output
effect of the large upfront fiscal impulse and deepened the recession.1 Thus, Greece has adjusted
mainly through recession, rather than through productivity-enhancing reforms.
1

As a result, with the benefit of hindsight, the macroeconomic assumptions at the initiation of the program proved
optimistic (see also the Ex Post Evaluation report and Box 1). In this regard, an earlier debt restructuring exercise—if it
had been feasible—could have provided for a somewhat more gradual fiscal adjustment path.

6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

C. Developments
5.
The recession has been one of the deepest
peacetime recessions in industrialized economies
(Figure 1–3 and Table 1–2). Overall, the economy
contracted by 22 percent between 2008 and 2012 and
unemployment rose to 27 percent; youth
unemployment now exceeds 60 percent. As domestic
demand shrank across all categories, net exports
provided support largely through shrinking imports.

6.


At the same time, Greece has made significant progress in redressing its imbalances.
Greece has achieved one of the largest fiscal adjustments to date (Table 3–5; text Figure).
The primary adjustment in 2010–12 amounted
to 9 percent of GDP, and was much higher
(15 percent of GDP) in cyclically-adjusted
terms. Following a major cut in public sector
wages and pensions in 2010, measures in
2011 relied mostly on tax increases. But the
new government has refocused the fiscal
consolidation on deep expenditure cuts,
including to wages and pensions. These cuts
have been socially painful, but necessary,
given that these expenditures were the
primary source of spending pressures leading
up to the crisis.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

GREECE



There have been substantial gains in cost competitiveness. The far-reaching labor market
reforms put in place in early 2012 have contributed to deeper wage corrections than in other
recent crisis cases and substantial adjustment in the ULC-based REER. Less encouraging has
been the weak and delayed response of prices to wage reductions, owing largely to product
market rigidities. This asymmetry in price adjustment has led to a substantial erosion in real
incomes and demand, and placed a disproportionate burden on wage earners relative to the self
employed and the corporate sector. It has also left the CPI-based REER overvalued in 2012 by
about 9 percent (Box 2). With the headline inflation now in negative territory and a widening
inflation differential with the euro area, the extent of overvaluation is gradually reducing and
relative prices between the tradable and nontradable sectors are adjusting.



Greece’s current account deficit improved from 15 percent of GDP in 2008 to 3½ percent
in 2012 (Table 6). The improvement was initially gradual, with high public sector savings offset
by private dissaving (facilitated by funding via
the TARGET2 system). However, initial
consumption smoothing (and import
demand) by the private sector gave way to
large increases in savings in 2012. As a result,
imports contracted substantially in 2012. The
current account adjusted significantly in
headline and structural terms, improving by
6½ percent of GDP (of which about 1 percent
can be attributed to the impact of lower
official debt servicing costs and debt buyback
discussed below). Nevertheless, the still
insufficient improvement in price

8

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

competitiveness has hindered export growth. The structural current account balance, estimated
at -5½ percent of potential GDP, is still somewhat weaker than the estimated norm of
-2½ percent, and points to the need for some further adjustment (Box 2).
7.
Notwithstanding extraordinary international support, the high-debt-low-growth
outcome made sovereign debt restructuring inevitable.


Greece received unprecedented international support. Given the high initial public debt-toGDP ratio, it was explicitly recognized in May 2010 that investors were likely to be unsettled and
question debt sustainability. To give the authorities the breathing space needed to establish a
strong record of policy implementation and in view of potentially devastating spillover risks of
bail-in, the SBA assumed that Greece would have to be “taken out of the market.” A three-year
financing package of €110 billion was put together.2 A further €173 billion was made available
with approval of the EFF arrangement in 2012 (about €136 billion of which was financing over
and above the undisbursed portion from the first package).



Failure to reinvigorate growth required debt restructuring—through both private sector
involvement (PSI) and official sector involvement (OSI)—to keep public debt on a
sustainable path. The PSI, including the subsequent buyback, generated a haircut equivalent to
65 percent of GDP. Although public debt still stood at 157 percent of GDP at end-2012 and is
projected to rise before a more sustained decline in the medium term, the debt burden has
fallen markedly. Rollover risks are contained since 90 percent of Greece’s public external debt is
owed to the official sector, and the average maturity of Greek debt at 17 years is twice the euro
area average. Near-term financing needs have been covered through committed European and
IMF loans. Furthermore, the effective interest
rate at 2½ percent is among the lowest in the
euro area, leaving debt service to GDP in line
with the euro area average. Greece’s European
partners also committed to provide further
relief in early 2014 and 2015, if primary
balance targets for 2013 and 2014 are met and
if needed to bring the projected debt-to-GDP
ratio to 124 percent by 2020 and to
substantially below 110 percent of GDP by
2022. Still, despite this framework for debt
reduction now in place, the debt burden is set
to remain exceptionally high well into the next
decade.

2

This bail-out strategy also helps explain the sharp increase in the ECB’s exposure to Greece and other countries in
the periphery during 2010 (e.g., through its Securities Market Program).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9

GREECE

8.
Debt restructuring frameworks are being put into place to deal with private debt,
given the impact of the crisis on household and corporate sector balance sheets. In the
household sector, the fall in disposable income nearly doubled the debt-to-disposable-income ratio
between 2009 and 2011 to 96 percent (higher than the peak observed in Latvia). Falling property
prices raised mortgage loan-to-value ratios from around 70 percent on average before the crisis
(lower than in European peers) to close to 90 percent in 2012 (higher than in Spain). In the nonfinancial corporate sector, there has been a considerable sectoral variation, but the decline in profits
has affected firms’ ability to service debt: the interest coverage ratio dropped from 24 percent in
2001 (one of the highest in Europe) to 2.4 percent in 2012 (higher only than Portugal). However, the
overall private sector balance sheet is supported by a positive net international investment position
vis-à-vis the rest of the world.

9.
Heavy damage has been inflicted on the banking system that started with relatively
low leverage, and the government has stepped in to recapitalize the system (Tables 7–9).


10

Banks lost access to wholesale funding markets
in 2010 and had to replace close to €60 billion
in maturing liabilities with other sources. The
funding gap became wider with deposit
outflows, which began in 2010 and reached
€83 billion by summer 2012, due to a
drawdown on savings and fears about euro exit
(outflows reversed after the elections and
completion of the first/second review under the
EFF arrangement, and €17 billion has since
returned). On the asset side, the government
debt restructuring generated a €38 billion loss
to the banking system, wiping out the capital

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

base already eroded by the recession-related deterioration of the loan portfolio. NPLs have been
rising fast, reaching 30 percent of total loans at the end of 2012 (including restructured loans).


In response to liquidity pressures, banks’ reliance on central bank funding peaked at about
€135 billion in 2012 (with heavy reliance at times on ELA). Further, the banks intensified their
deleveraging efforts by reducing loans by about 12 percent since end-2009 and focusing their
activity on restructuring rapidly rising NPLs. By 2012, a further deterioration in asset quality and
the PSI required a total of €50 billion to recapitalize four core banks and restructure smaller
banks and cooperatives through mergers and resolution. Capital injections have now put the
banking system largely under state ownership, and steps are being taken to ensure that banks
continue to operate on a commercial basis (through maintaining private control in banks where
private investors contributed 10 percent of the capital needs; installing monitoring trustees;
enhancing supervision for the non-core banks; and addressing failures in their internal
procedures through a forthcoming distressed asset review).

D. Outlook
10.
Greece’s recovery is expected to be gradual,
similarly to experiences with internal devaluation
elsewhere. Staff projections are based upon
implementation of productivity-boosting structural
reforms, albeit at a more measured pace than
assumed previously and consistent with what has been
evident about the constraints on the pace of these
reforms thus far.


Staff projects a return to modest growth in
2014. Steady program implementation is expected
to help turn around expectations, improve liquidity

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

11

GREECE

conditions, and lead to a recovery beginning in 2014. The cyclical recovery is projected to
accelerate with growth peaking at 3¾ percent in 2016 due to stronger investment (reflecting
both pent-up demand and new profit opportunities), net exports (reflecting further
improvements in competitiveness), and ultimately private consumption (when real incomes
recover). Fiscal adjustment will remain a drag on growth, subtracting over 2 percentage points
from the 2013 growth, but considerably less beyond 2013 when adjustment needs start to taper
off.


The speed of recovery is projected to be weaker than after previous recessions. The cyclical
rebound will be muted since part of the physical and human capital has become obsolete during
the crisis and will likely continue to deteriorate,
and the need to rebuild balance sheets will be a
drag on demand. It will also take time to fully
unwind the competitiveness gap, given lags in
the transmission of ULC improvements to prices.
Present estimates suggest that the
competitiveness and output gaps could persist
until late in the decade. Overall, the dynamics of
the Greek recovery resemble those in transition
economies in the 1990s, where large
reallocations were undertaken in an unstable
macroeconomic environment albeit alongside
exchange rate depreciation (text Figure).



In the long-term, growth in Greece is
projected to gradually settle at around 1¾ percent per annum. Total factor productivity
growth is projected to be about 1¼ percent per annum (in line with the literature on long-term
effects of structural reforms and estimates for Greece; see Selected Issues Paper or SIP). But
growth will be held back by demographics, with the working age population falling by about
¼ percentage point per annum.

11.

The recovery hinges on a number of factors, pointing to risks.



Steadfast implementation of structural reforms is critically assumed, absent which
investment and growth will likely disappoint. Delayed or incomplete implementation would
adversely impact expectations and investments, and have longer-term repercussions for
resource re-allocation and productivity growth. Moreover, high unemployment and difficult
policy measures could undermine social and political cohesion. A tail risk under such a
scenario—dependent also on political reactions in Europe—is an exit of Greece from the
currency union, which would have further sharp short-term adverse impacts on the economy
and potentially spillovers to other currency union members.



Financial intermediation needs to be fully repaired. A well-functioning financial system is
necessary to support investment by allocating scarce resources to the most productive uses.

12

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Failure to strengthen the governance framework of banks and contain the rise of NPLs could
result in a mis-allocation of resources and a drag on growth.


Reform of tax and public administration is essential to improving the distribution of the
adjustment burden and completing the remaining fiscal adjustment in a growth-friendly
manner. Improvements in revenue administration that broadens the tax base, and mandatory
redundancies that create room for new, well-qualified and motivated staff and modernize the
public sector, would deliver the adjustment in a socially fair manner. Otherwise, further raising
the tax rate or cutting spending would risk not only exacerbating adverse demand impacts on
the economy but also undermining support for the program.



A credible framework for reducing Greece’s high debt is needed to limit the drag on
investment and growth. The commitment of Greece’s European partners to further conditional
debt relief is key in this regard, as high debt could continue to weigh on investment.

12.

Spillover risks—both outward and inward—have come down, but remain elevated:



Direct outward spillover risks have receded. Private sector exposure to Greece has fallen to
below 1 percent of euro area GDP, and official exposure is relatively small at around 2 percent of
creditor countries’ GDP. There are lingering risks in countries with a large presence of Greek
bank subsidiaries, which are being managed through policy actions (recapitalization of the Greek
banking system) and coordination among national authorities.



Contagion risks remain elevated, as fears of a possible Greek exit from the euro area have not
yet been fully taken off the table. Potential spillovers to other currency union members have
been explored in recent Greece staff reports—the output costs of a Greek exit is fundamentally
uncertain and of a very large magnitude in certain scenarios (see Box 2 in the Staff Report on the
Request for an EFF arrangement, and Box 2 in the Staff Report for the First and Second Review
under the EFF arrangement).



Adverse developments in the rest of euro area would have large spillovers to Greece (see
Table 10). A deeper and more prolonged recession in euro zone would have a substantial impact
on growth given the projected reliance on exports to drive the recovery. Moreover, while Greece
is not projected to tap the market in the near future, a wider re-assessment of risks in the euro
area could affect Greece through higher borrowing costs from the ESM (if the ESM’s borrowing
costs increase).



The direct impact of the crisis in Cyprus has been relatively contained: the direct trade
impact is projected to be limited, and spillovers from Cypriot bank branch operations in Greece
have been dealt with through their absorption into a Greek bank. The largest risks are indirect, in
particular from deposit outflows, if perceptions were to take hold that uninsured depositors in
Greek banks may also be subject to haircuts, policy efforts notwithstanding (see Box 1 in the
accompanying third review staff report).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

13

GREECE

13.
The authorities acknowledged the above downsides to growth, but highlighted also
some upside potential. They noted that improvements in cost competitiveness and reductions in
barriers to entry are creating profit opportunities, which will boost investments once uncertainty is
resolved. They pointed, however, to financing constraints for the private sector, and stressed that
improving liquidity conditions in the economy is key to jump starting investments and growth.

POLICY DISCUSSIONS
14.
There was consensus on the main achievements to date and the key challenges still
ahead. There was agreement that Greece had made considerable progress in overcoming deepseated problems, in particular, that fiscal policy had been extremely strong and that far-reaching
labor market reforms were now facilitating a rapid rebalancing. However, there was also agreement
that progress in other areas of structural reforms had been considerably less than hoped for, and
that this—together with political turmoil and doubts about debt sustainability—had prevented the
expected recovery in investment, leaving the economy to continue to contract in response to the
strong negative fiscal impulse.
15.
Against this background, discussions focused on the key policy actions needed for
Greece to complete its adjustment and return to a balanced growth path. In particular, the
discussions focused on strategies to: (i) restore growth by speeding up structural reforms and the
process of internal devaluation; (ii) ensure adequate support for the recovery from the financial
system; (iii) complete the remaining fiscal adjustment in an equitable way; and (iv) reduce public
debt to sustainable levels.

A. Restoring Growth
16.
Structural rigidities have played a key role in raising Greece’s adjustment cost
(Figure 4). While rebalancing from non-traded to traded sectors would be challenging in any
circumstance, particularly when undertaken in a fixed exchange rate regime, rigidities in product and
labor markets have contributed to especially high adjustment costs in Greece (see SIP for an
empirical analysis). The improvement in the trade balance by 9 percentage points coincided with
output contraction by 22 percent—a much worse ’sacrifice ratio’ than in other economies.


14

Burden of regulation. The key factors include: (i) state ownership and restrictions on use of
important assets, which remain underutilized (e.g., because of land zoning restrictions) or
subject to monopolies (network utilities); (ii) excessive regulations, with permits, licensing and
export-import requirements well inferior to EU best practice; and (iii) barriers to entry into closed
professions and new markets, including from excessive bureaucracy, corruption, and opaque tax
and labor regulations. These factors have limited competition (including from FDI), kept prices
and margins well above the EU average, and preserved an economic model based on small and
inefficient enterprises.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE



Rigid labor market regulations that protect insiders. The labor market has traditionally
suffered from a closed and inflexible system of collective bargaining, very high firing costs
(severance payments and redundancy notification periods), a high national minimum wage
relative to competitors, and high non-wage labor costs.

17.
Potential gains from addressing labor and product market frictions to foster
adjustment are large. Simulations from a calibrated model for Greece indicate that the labor
market reforms that have been undertaken have the potential to substantially improve the external
position of the economy through adjustment in real wages and imports, and boost GDP growth
during the transition to new steady-state equilibrium by around ¼ of a percentage point per
annum. Eliminating barriers to entry in the product markets could add an additional ½ of a
percentage point to growth during the transition period by stimulating investments, lowering prices,
and restoring purchasing power and consumption of households. In the long term, these labor and
product market reforms are estimated to raise GDP by about 3 and 7 percent respectively (these
results are broadly in line with previous theoretical and empirical studies). These reforms would also
enhance the flexibility of the economy to adjust to future shocks, improve burden sharing of the
cost of adjustment, and help create an environment to better reap the benefits from membership in
the monetary union.
18.
With labor market reforms well advanced, removing barriers to entry in product
markets is now the main priority. Reducing formal and informal restrictions in product markets is
inherently a multifaceted and lengthy process. Identifying the multitude of restrictions takes time,
and tackling those faces opposition from vested interests and is difficult administratively. Reforms in
some areas have advanced and the authorities plan to remove many remaining restrictions (e.g., in
the retail sector, certain regulated professions, transportation services, as well as in reducing borderrelated red tape). But the process remains well away from the needed critical mass of reforms, and
some key reforms are still at the preparatory stage. They include identifying and removing barriers
to competition in tourism, machinery, food processing, and construction materials; reducing the
burden of administrative red tape and regulations; and passing anti-corruption legislation in line
with international standards and implementing the authorities’ anti-corruption plan without delay.
Speeding up the judicial process through civil procedure reform will be key to improve contract and
tax enforcement. Progress in privatization will be necessary to open up markets, and here too the
work has only just started.
19.
In addition, the authorities are considering other potential measures to facilitate
investment. These include setting up a development bank and tax free zones, and targeting
subsidies (or tax expenditures) to specific sectors. It is not clear, however, whether such measures
will deliver benefits. The international evidence on the benefits for growth is mixed at best, while
costs include diverted resources, potentially lost revenue, and a more complex system to administer.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

15

GREECE

Authorities’ views
20.
The authorities accepted that performance on structural reforms had been
disappointing in part because of political turmoil. They noted that progress had been achieved
in many areas, but concurred that a policy mix involving greater structural reform implementation
would have helped smooth the recession to date, and can help going forward. In this regard, they
were confident that there is a broad realization in Greek society that deep across-the-board changes
are needed to modernize the economy, and a growing realization at the political level that this is
becoming a matter of urgency. They argued that the potential for catch up of productivity remains
large, and they felt that potential growth could be higher than projected by staff. On the near-term
priorities, a review is planned of the progress achieved in opening up the 20 largest closed
professions, with a view to further lowering entry barriers, and the pace of privatization is set to pick
up with the first major sale about to be completed. The authorities also accepted that the scope for
additional pro-growth spending by the public sector is strictly limited, although they noted that EU
grant-financed projects provide some fiscal space.

B. Financial Sector: Supporting the Recovery
21.
The growth strategy relies on shifting resources to more productive uses, and
repairing the financial system is important to facilitate this process (Tables 7–8 and Figure 5).
The restructuring and the nearly-completed recapitalization of the banking system are important
milestones. But credit growth is expected to lag the recovery in output for an extended period of
time. This reflects constraints anticipated on the funding side (a slow return of deposits offset by a
reduction in central bank financing) and on capital (as banks absorb losses on non-performing
loans), and a cautious projected lending policy (gradually reducing the loan-to-deposit ratio to the
long-term average of 80 percent). But it is important to ensure that credit conditions do not remain
so tight, nor deleveraging so persistent, as to derail recovery.
22.
Although challenging, flat or even shrinking credit stocks can be consistent with
growth, if allocated efficiently. Cross-country experience reveals that up to 25 percent of all
recoveries do not depend on credit growth: it takes time for lenders and borrowers to repair their
balance sheets (see SIP).


Aggregate credit conditions often hide sectoral variations: in Greece, the 15 percent reduction in
the overall credit since mid-2010 has masked a positive credit growth to some sectors (public
utilities and tourism), offset by contractions in others (manufacturing, shipping, and wholesale
and retail trade).



To support activity, firms would need to use internal sources of capital or access non-bank
external financing, such as FDI or direct access to capital markets. But the scope for the latter
may be more limited in Greece because of the very large share of small enterprises.



Going forward, to ensure efficient allocation and given that the state is set to assume ownership
of much of the banking system, it will be critical for regulators to keep banks free of political

16

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

influence in their lending practices. The authorities have put in place governance safeguards for
all banks, to ensure arm’s length involvement by the state while protecting the state against
fraud. These include the HFSF as owner (with a sufficient number of independent directors),
monitoring trustees, and relationship frameworks. While these safeguards are welcome, staff is
concerned that they are not yet fully effective, given Greece’s poor record with state-run banks.
Therefore, an urgent priority is to rapidly re-privatize banks under the control of the HFSF.


Moreover, in a situation where funding is likely to be a constraint, it is particularly important that
scarce funding not be trapped into continuously refinancing the same loan, but rather be
directed to the most productive uses. Thus, regulatory practices discouraging such evergreening
will be key to ensuring sufficient credit to new and dynamic enterprises, not least SMEs.

23.
At the same time, targeted and well-designed restructuring programs to deal with the
loans of viable but over-indebted borrowers can facilitate investment and consumption.
Successful examples of government-sponsored restructuring programs in the aftermath of the
financial crisis include the US (2008), the UK (2008), and Iceland (2010). Key lessons that have
emerged are: (i) restructuring should occur when there is a systemic risk to the economy;
(ii) targeted relief should be provided to the most distressed borrowers; (iii) if borrowers are
insolvent, an NPV negative restructuring is usually needed; and (iv) proposals should be designed in
conjunction with the banks. Furthermore, the eligibility criteria for each program should differentiate
between borrowers temporarily in difficulty (and thus in need of forbearance) and those in need of
more long-term solutions. In Greece, the authorities are putting in place a household debt
restructuring framework aimed at providing standardized forbearance solutions which will
significantly speed banks’ procedures compared to a case-by-case approach (see the accompanying
third review staff report). They also intend to introduce a legislative framework to provide long-term
solutions for over-indebted borrowers. A concern in this regard is that these restructuring schemes
might be overly generous and amenable to political pressures, which could damage the payment
culture and the ability of the banking system to extend credit. The authorities are conducting a
distressed credit operations review of banks’ NPL resolution practices, and will set-up and monitor
targets for NPL resolutions for banks to ensure timely progress.
24.
The authorities need to guard against potential bank capital constraints. Ensuring
banks are sufficiently capitalized has been the focus of the financial sector strategy, and at the
moment the banks are fully capitalized. Going forward, the capital needs and financial sector
program envelope may change due to a number of factors: (i) the macroeconomic environment has
deteriorated beyond that envisaged in the last stress test, which will likely reduce earnings capacity
and increase loan losses; (ii) the banking system structure has changed significantly due to on-going
consolidation in the sector; (iii) banks and the authorities have taken steps to reduce the reliance on
public funds (e.g., private sector participation, liability management exercises, foreign subsidiary
recapitalizations, and a relaxation of caps on deferred tax assets); and (iv) the authorities are
introducing policies to tackle NPLs. Once banking sector consolidation is complete, a further
detailed stress test in late 2013 will help clarify future capital needs. While capital losses need to be
minimized and paths to raising additional capital established, staff believes on balance and based on

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

17

GREECE

current information that the €50 billion recapitalization envelope, which includes a €5 billion
conservatism buffer, will suffice to meet any potential shortfall:


Reducing capital consumption (beyond loan restructuring). Greek banks need to maximize
their recoveries from loans in default. The authorities’ focus has rightly been on revising the
regulatory framework to remove operational restrictions facing liquidators in charge of running
down the bad assets of resolved banks, and to align their roles and functions closer with those
of an asset manager. By doing so, the legal framework could allow for borrowing firms to
potentially continue operating as going concerns rather than face liquidation. An alternative
approach, to deal more generally with bad assets of resolved banks as well as distressed
portfolios of the operating banks, would be to set up a centralized asset management company
(e.g., as in Spain). This approach is less likely to be advantageous for Greece where distressed
assets are distributed across asset classes. Purchasing of impaired assets of banks in operation
by an AMC may also require funding beyond the financial sector support envelope.



Raising additional capital. A priority is to bring banks to the point where they can re-access
capital from markets. For the two banks that are controlled by private shareholders, a three-year
lock-out period prevents the HFSF from attracting new investors, and existing shareholders have
the right to use any resources to buy back HFSF shares rather than contribute fresh capital. The
authorities should make efforts to attract new private capital to state-controlled core banks,
bringing in strategic investors and preparing the banks for re-privatization as soon as possible.

25.
Another key consideration going forward will be how to improve funding availability.
International experience has shown that sovereign re-access is generally necessary before financial
sector re-access to wholesale markets. In Greece, the sovereign-bank link has been attenuated
substantially—Greek banks after PSI have very little exposure to the Greek sovereign—which should
facilitate market access. Meanwhile, longer-term funding could be sought through multilateral
agencies, in addition to a return of deposits to the Greek banking system:


EIB and EBRD funding. Greek banks could use low-cost EIB funding to on-lend to SMEs, similar
to Portugal. Greek subsidiaries in the EU Accession countries could replace funding from their
parent banks with the EBRD SME Finance Facility (subject to coordination with host countries,
e.g., in providing guarantees for the EBRD). In both cases, the credit risk would remain on the
banks’ balance sheet. The authorities engaged the EIB by establishing a joint dedicated
guarantee fund supporting lending to SMEs in March 2012. With a start-up capital of €500mn
from unabsorbed Structural Funds for Greece, the fund will guarantee EIB loans to SMEs via
partner banks in Greece totaling up to €1 billion (these guarantees help ease capital constraints).



Attracting deposits. Staff estimates that as much as €58 billion of the total €71 billion that left
the Greek banking system between 2010 and end 2012 was flight capital (either leaving the
country or stored as cash outside the banking system), although about €17 billion has since
returned. A further return of deposits would help improve banks’ funding base. The authorities’
strategy relies on successful program implementation and decisive bank recapitalization as pull
factors, and on cracking down on evaded taxes from amounts outside the country (to reduce the

18

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

incentive to keep funds outside). This strategy should be accompanied by the effective
implementation of AML measures to prevent tax evaders from misusing Greek financial
institutions, and to facilitate access to information on accounts held abroad through all available
international cooperation channels.
26.
Complementary measures to strengthen non-bank intermediation are being
considered. As noted, the authorities’ proposals include the establishment of a development fund
that would guarantee bank lending, or a small cooperative bank for lending to SMEs. International
experience suggests caution with such approaches: these institutions often increase their lending
with the election cycle, tend to finance the government to a greater degree than the private banks,
are lacking in their managerial practices, and are subject to government intervention in credit
decisions. Where there has been success abroad, key factors have included: i) a clear mandate to
target only those sectors underserved by commercial banks, and not competing with them;
ii) independence from political influence; iii) professional management; iv) while not deposit taking,
should be subject to the same supervisory and prudential regulations as commercial banks; and
v) clearly defined performance measures, such as a minimum return on capital. In light of the poor
track record of such institutions in Greece in the past (the state-owned Agricultural Bank of Greece
had a history of weak controls and public recapitalizations triggered by large NPLs that were
eventually written off), however, there remain concerns about the risk of political interference in
these schemes.

Authorities’ views
27.
The authorities concurred with staff’s general assessment of the constraints faced by
the banking sector in credit provision. They agreed that successful program implementation and
return of confidence following recapitalization are by far the most important factors in attracting
deposits and improving funding constraints. On NPL resolution, the authorities cautioned against
pushing banks to clear NPLs too aggressively, since losses are likely to be highest at the bottom of
business cycle. They were more favorably inclined to establish an Asset Management Company to
deal with banks’ bad assets as well as those under liquidation, suggesting that such a scheme might
improve investors’ interest in the Greek banking sector and could minimize losses for the state. They
also agreed that it would be essential to prevent political interference in the management of banks
with public capital, but were confident that the safeguards put in place were effective.

C. Advancing Fiscal Adjustment
28.
While Greece has made very significant progress, completing the fiscal adjustment
through 2016 will require: (i) delivering gains in tax administration over this period of
1½ percent of GDP; and (ii) identifying further measures equivalent to about 2 percent of
GDP in 2015–16. The baseline projection assumes that the above-stated gains from tax
administration reform materialize. With respect to the remaining 2 percent gap, there is some scope
for the authorities to further adjust spending programs and taxation:

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

19

GREECE



Spending cuts. Public administration reform, which has not yet started in earnest and requires
closing inefficient entities and programs and reducing staff in a targeted manner through exits,
could generate ½ percent of GDP in savings. Savings of 1–1½ percent of GDP might be possible
from rationalizing education and social spending, which should also be better targeted. But
room for other cuts appears limited. After shrinking by 3½ percentage points since 2009, the
primary expenditure ratio is now below the EU median. Health spending, public sector wages,
and intermediate consumption have all been reduced sharply.



Tax increases. There is scope for further base broadening, in particular to further increase
revenue from sectors that have not contributed fully to the adjustment so far. For instance,
raising direct taxes on the self-employed and removing some of the special reduced VAT rates
could generate gains of up to ¼ percent of GDP. Room for tax rate hikes is limited: direct labor
taxes already constitute a very large share of income (above 43 percent compared to an average
of 30 percent in the EU).

Beyond the 1½ percent of GDP revenue gains above, further gains from revenue administration are
critically important to improve the composition of fiscal policy including needed tax rate reductions,
a stronger safety net, and a more modern public administration.
29.
However, Greece also faces social safety net spending needs and a need to in fact
reduce its high tax rates, but these will require identifying additional high-quality measures.
Some elements of the social safety net are inadequate, particularly in light of the large and unequal
distribution of adjustment costs. For instance, the net replacement rate of unemployment benefits is
just below the 20th EU percentile (but is in part compensated by higher severance), and social
benefits target only half of the poorest 30 percent of the population. The program commits Greece
to identify and fill social safety net needs. Meanwhile, tax rate reductions are needed to boost
competitiveness. The program targets a reduction in the labor tax wedge (to deliver a fiscal
devaluation, in light of earlier VAT increases), while Greece’s high corporate tax rate relative to its
regional competitors is also an issue. These safety net and tax reductions will consume a good part
of the gains from spending and tax base broadening measures.
30.
The key to realizing Greece’s medium-term adjustment remains improvements in
revenue collection efficiency (Figure 6). This reform is critical to achieving the medium-term
primary surplus target, upgrading and modernizing the public sector to be able to provide highquality services, and over time to making room for needed tax rate reductions, while avoiding new
spending cuts. Potential gains are large, estimated as high as 5 percent of GDP (see SIP). Taking this
route would also help improve equity in sharing the adjustment costs: despite the overall
progressivity of the adjustment so far (including through the recent income tax reform), there has
been a growing sense of unfairness stemming from the failure to reduce tax evasion.
31.
Gains through revenue collection are, however, highly uncertain in terms of their size
and timing. Country experience shows that, while targeted reforms can deliver benefits in even less
than one year, comprehensive reorganizations of the type Greece is undertaking can sometimes
take close to 10 years to fully deliver (text table). Greece’s program anticipates gains in the range of

20

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

¼ to ½ percent of GDP in the first year, cumulating to about ¾ percent in 2015 and 1½ percent of
GDP by 2016. This is consistent with experience in other countries: Bulgaria increased tax and SSC
collection by 5 percent of GDP, and VAT collection by 3 percent of GDP, over a 6-year period. The
revenue gains are conservative compared to some more successful cases, such as Georgia, where tax
revenues to GDP rose by 6 percentage points in 2005–07. But they could also be lower than
targeted, as they have to date under the program. The crucial issue for Greece will be how quickly it
can successfully implement reforms going forward.
Country Experiences with Institutional Reforms
Country

Type of Revenue Administration Reform

Bulgaria

New unified revenue administration; consolidating 340 offices into 29; upgrading
functions; merging SSC collection into tax administration; IT platform (2000-2009).
Further reduction of offices from 29 to 7 (2009). (Tax and SSC collection increased by
5 percent of GDP, and VAT collection by 3 percent of GDP, during 2002–2008.)

Georgia

FYROM

Peru

Hungary

Reorganized tax headquarters and field units; new tax code and simplified
administrative procedures; abolishing compulsory audit of all annual filings and
adopting a risk-based approach to tax audits; compulsory electronic filing; new two
stage administrative dispute resolution mechanism. (Tax revenues rose by 6 percent
of GDP in this period.)
New tax procedures law; restructuring of headquarters and field offices; creating
large taxpayer office; flexibility in hiring, firing, rewarding staff; integrating collection
of social insurance contributions to tax agency. (Income tax revenues rose by
½ percent of GDP in 2005–08.)
Creating an independent revenue administration agency directly reporting to the
president with full budget flexibility. (Tax revenues rose by 2½ percent of GDP in
this period.)
Comprehensive: reorganizing the HQ office; creating an LTU; Improving VAT and PIT
procedures: new arrears management approach; IT upgrade; Improving audit
selection. (VAT revenues rose by ½ percent of GDP between 1994 and 1997.)

Period
2000–2009

2005–2007

2005–2009

1991–1995

1993–1998

Sources: World Bank 2009; Durand, 1996; IOTA Tax Tribune Issue 28, 2011.

32.
Evidence from other cases suggests that a number of elements are critical to the
success of tax administration reform efforts, each of which features in Greece’s program (see
also the third review staff report). Above all, unwavering political commitment is the most critical
element to the success (or failure) of such efforts.


Insulation from political interference, while maintaining checks and balances. The head of
the revenue administration should have sufficient powers and flexibility to drive the reforms
forward, and then be held accountable (e.g., Latvia, Hungary). In Greece, important strides have
been made to establish a legal framework that provides greater autonomy and flexibility to the
head of the revenue administration. The key now is to overcome inertia and demonstrate
unequivocal support for the process by implementing the legislation in the next 6 months and

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

21

GREECE

showing through action that sufficient autonomy has been achieved and that the problem of
political interference and patronage has been tackled.


Increasing efficiency. The organizational structure needs to be transformed and refocused to
better utilize resources and improve efficiency in units that have the greatest revenue potential
(e.g., large taxpayer unit and high-wealth individuals unit). In Greece, the authorities must
operationalize overdue reforms: (i) by providing new management and staff support to the units
for large debt collection and audit of large taxpayers and high-wealth individuals; (ii) via staff
training, improving grade and promotion incentives, and implementing performance
assessments; and (iii) by implementing newly adopted legislation to streamline write-offs of
uncollectable debt, risk-based selection of audit cases, indirect audit methods, and dispute
resolution.



Strengthened collection enforcement. Discretionary tax administration practices that provide
for discounts, including amnesties, must be replaced with stronger enforcement (e.g., placing
lien and seizure of assets). Repeated amnesties have been a serious problem, and contributed
substantially to weakening the payment culture. In this regard, the authorities have made
important—albeit still modest—improvements to the collection enforcement toolkit, such as
new powers under the AML legislation and streamlined judicial procedures. Long overdue steps
have been taken to reform the previous culture of automatic installments: new tax and SSC debt
installment plans were adopted, in line with best international practice. Full implementation of
these reforms would put to rest concerns about actual commitment in this area.



Greater transparency, improved performance measurement, and simplification of tax and
procedural legislation. Simpler tax policy and tax procedures rules provide greater incentives
for taxpayers to comply with their tax obligations and are easier to administer (e.g., Latvia
recently reformed its tax and customs code to reduce discretion of tax officials and simplify
procedures). The authorities have simplified the income tax regime, and are working to overhaul
the income tax legislation by removing provisions that do not belong in it and consolidating
income tax policy provisions contained in other pieces of legislation. Similarly, an overhaul of tax
procedures is expected to result in a simpler and more transparent code by mid-2013.
Implementation will be key.

Authorities’ views
33.
The authorities concurred with these conclusions, and expressed moderate optimism
about the direction of the institutional reforms. They saw little social support for further deep
cuts in wages and pensions and tax increases, and agreed that policy options are becoming more
limited. They agreed that it is critical to the success of fiscal adjustment and for broader political
support of the program that tax administration reforms begin to deliver results. They acknowledged
that the administration would face a huge challenge to implement the necessary wide-ranging
reforms quickly, and emphasized their political commitment to see the process through.

22

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

D. Strategy to Reduce Public Debt
34.
Greece’s debt is projected to remain high well into the next decade (Appendix I). The
debt reduction strategy relies on four pillars:


The resumption of growth. Under program projections, the resumption of real growth will
contribute 30 percentage points to the reduction in the debt ratio by 2020.



Fiscal adjustment. Achievement of the primary surplus target of 4½ percent in 2016 (reduced
to 4¼ percent by 2020) will improve medium-term debt dynamics in a long-lasting way.



Privatization is projected to make a contribution to debt reduction equivalent to roughly
10 percentage points of GDP by 2020.



Conditional debt relief. Debt sustainability going forward is underpinned by the euro area
Member States’ commitment in December 2012 to provide any further relief necessary—
conditional on Greece fully implementing the program—to ensure that Greece’s debt reaches
124 percent of GDP in 2020; and significantly below 110 percent of GDP by 2022. Under staff’s
current DSA, this will require yet unspecified additional relief of 4 percent of GDP by 2020 as well
as at least a further 3 percent of GDP by 2022.

35.
As high debt implies Greece will remain accident prone, the conditional relief
framework must credibly bring down debt. This framework for tackling the debt overhang has
sought to balance the need for firm commitment to debt relief (to protect investor confidence) with
an incentive structure that avoids moral hazard (see Box 1 in the Staff Report on the Request for an
EFF arrangement, and Box 4 in the Staff Report on the First/Second Review under the EFF
arrangement). With the projected debt path contingent on both considerable and sustained fiscal
adjustment as well as extended financing support from euro area member states, the core risks
stemming from high debt have not been eliminated. There is a risk that investors will not consider
the framework to be sufficient to restore debt sustainability. Debt therefore may continue to weigh
on investment, and the assumed recovery may not take hold. The macroeconomic and debt outlook
must remain under close review.

Authorities’ views
36.
The authorities broadly agreed with this assessment. They highlighted, in particular, the
negative effects of the debt level on sovereign spreads, market confidence, and investment. In that
regard, they welcomed Europe’s commitment to provide further debt relief and understood the
importance in this regard of their meeting the required fiscal balance targets.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

23

GREECE

STATISTICS
37.
Greece has made significant progress in addressing statistical shortcomings from the
past, but the gains must be preserved in the face of ongoing political pressures. The new
Statistical Law established ELSTAT as an independent statistical agency, which is an important
accomplishment. Professional independence supported by law, and giving freedom from political
interference, is in line with the Fund’s Data Quality Assessment Framework. The Greek statistical
authorities have recently benefited from technical assistance in GFS from the Fund and Eurostat. The
actions foreseen in the Joint Overall Statistical Greek Action Plan have been implemented on a
consistent basis and there has been improvement in the process of GFS compilation by ELSTAT,
including coverage, timeliness, and consistency with international statistical standards. These
significant gains have been hard-won and should be protected by defending the statistical agency
against any efforts to undermine its credibility, guaranteeing its professional independence, and
securing its adequate and stable resources. These principles have been endorsed by the Greek
government in February 2012 in the “Commitment on Confidence in Statistics” and should be firmly
respected.

STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
Greece has unquestionably made significant strides in overcoming deep-seated
problems. Three achievements stand out:


Progress on fiscal adjustment has been exceptional by any international comparison, with the
primary balance now set to swing into a surplus by end-2013, having improved by 16 percent of
GDP in structural terms. Greece is well underway to complete its fiscal adjustment.



The competitiveness gap has narrowed by about one-half, as bold labor market reforms are
helping realign wages and productivity, while the current account deficit has dropped by about
10 percent of GDP. The economy is now rebalancing fast.



Financial sector stability has been preserved, despite large losses associated with the PSI and the
recession-induced surge in NPLs. This is a major achievement for an economy undergoing such
a dramatic recession and rapid rebalancing.

39.
Significantly, Greece has been able to stay within the euro area and the program has
thus fulfilled what throughout the crisis has been the overarching concern of Greek society
and body polity. In this regard, the program undoubtedly internalized constraints on its policies
and options coming from membership of the euro area that do not exist in countries outside. This
includes taking into account the impact of policy choices on other members of the currency union.
While such constraints have been a matter of much debate and have evolved as the crisis has
unfolded, for Greek policymakers taking actions that could jeopardize Greece’s membership in the
euro area was never an option that they were willing to consider. Staff agrees that euro exit would

24

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

have devastating consequences, and that this would not avoid Greece having to undertake the
comprehensive and difficult structural reforms needed to modernize its economy.
40.
However, the recession was much deeper than expected, and the social cost has been
very high. While GDP was on track in 2010, a key assumption of the program—that, after two years,
a recovery in investment would begin to more than offset the drag from fiscal tightening, paving the
way for a gradual recovery in 2012—failed to materialize. Greece was hit by a series of negative and
mutually reinforcing shocks—political turmoil, failure to implement structural reforms, uncertainty
about the external financing strategy, and ever rising concerns about debt sustainability (which
could, with the benefit of hindsight, partially have been addressed by an earlier restructuring
exercise, if such an exercise had been feasible)—that jolted the investment climate from early 2011
and exacerbated the downdrafts from fiscal tightening. These developments fueled the specter of
euro exit and sent spreads to default-levels.
41.
This suggests that the current program can only succeed if policy makers—in Greece
and abroad—address these root causes of the lack of confidence. Like in the original program,
the assumed recovery in 2014 still hinges on the assumption that an improved investment climate
will by then begin to offset what is set to be a drag on growth from fiscal policy in the next few
years. Without an improvement in sentiment, the economy will continue to contract, stretching the
already seriously strained social fabric. Steadfast implementation of key reforms thus remains
essential, although the pace of reforms in the program has now been calibrated more in line with
the constraints evident from the experience of recent years. Similarly, the assumed recovery will not
materialize if investors remain concerned about debt sustainability and the credibility of policies to
bring down the huge debt burden.
42.
As to policy makers in Greece, refocusing the program on key reforms could do much
to shore up broader support. Maintaining public support while advancing what is bound to be
painful reforms will pose a formidable political challenge. However, much of the sense of social
injustice reflects the fact that failure to advance key reforms has caused an unequal burden of
adjustment. Reforms need to be refocused on three key areas:


Curtailing tax evasion: Limited progress has been made in tackling Greece’s notorious tax
evasion. The rich and self-employed are not paying their fair share, which has forced an
excessive reliance on across-the-board expenditure cuts and higher taxes on those earning a
salary or a pension. Tackling tax evasion, including by putting in place safeguards against what
remains significant political interference in tax administration, is an overarching priority.



Opening up the economy: While labor market reforms are causing a notable decline in wages,
this has only to a limited degree been reflected in lower prices, because of the failure to
decisively liberalize closed professions and product markets and strengthen the investment
framework. High prices and lower wages is another way in which too much of the burden has
fallen on those earning wages and pensions. Redoubling efforts to open up the economy to
competition is another priority.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

25

GREECE



Accepting mandatory public sector lay-offs. While the rebalancing of the economy has been
associated with a surge in unemployment in the private sector, the over-staffed public sector
has been spared. In a country with youth unemployment of over 60 percent, political reluctance
to fire even workers who do not show up for work is inexplicable. Recent announcements of
planned layoffs are a start. Without progress in this area, staff doubts that Greece can meet its
medium-term fiscal targets without further across-the-board cuts in pensions and wages.

43.
The accompanying third review staff report presents just such a refocusing of the
program. The disappointing track record to date suggests that these reforms will be fiercely
contested by a small, but well-entrenched, group of narrow vested interests. Reform efforts that
could have a large pay-off in terms of broad political support for the program must not be allowed
to falter because of an inability to overcome opposition from what are far more privileged vested
interests. Staff takes note of the government’s assurances that it is keenly aware of what is riding on
such success and that it is determined to push ahead with reforms.
44.
As far as European partners are concerned, it is critical that they dispel any doubts
about their commitment to ensure debt sustainability. The Eurogroup’s promise to provide
additional relief to keep debt on the programmed path, if necessary and if primary balance targets
are met, provides a welcome framework for restoring debt sustainability. The credibility of this
framework is bolstered by the fact that virtually all debt is now on public balance sheets. Still, even
under this framework, debt will remain exceptionally high well into the next decade. This could raise
concerns on the part of investors about whether the framework is credible, in particular because of
the contingency linking debt relief to policy implementation. Should debt sustainability concerns
prove to be weighing on investor sentiment going forward, strong program implementation by the
Greek authorities notwithstanding, then a more front-loaded approach to debt relief would need to
be considered.
45.
The next Article IV consultation with Greece is expected to take place on a 24-month
cycle.

26

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Box 1. Why Has the Recession In Greece Been So Deep?
Failure to implement structural reforms and adverse shocks that amplified the negative fiscal
impulse contributed to the depth of the recession in Greece.



As expected, fiscal adjustment primed the recession at the outset of the program. To arrest
the ballooning public debt and constrained by the
scale of official available support, Greece adopted
an ambitious fiscal adjustment path. The adjustment
under the SBA was projected to be among the
largest and most frontloaded ever recorded, with
planned measures in 2010-12 amounting to
15½ percent of GDP (including 7½ percent of GDP
in 2010 alone). This was projected to have a
significant recessionary impact. Using Greecespecific multipliers estimated by OECD (2009), staff
projected the impact to be over 3 percent of GDP in
2010, and staff projections were close to actual (4
vs. 5 percent).



Structural reforms were projected to start working their way through the economy relatively
fast and offset the impact of further tightening, but projected gains did not materialize.
Deregulation and privatization were expected to
turn around expectations, and boost investments to
exploit new profit opportunities. Income policies
(reductions in public wages and changes to
collective bargaining framework) were expected to
improve cost competitiveness, which, together with
pro-competition structural reforms, would reduce
relative prices over time, encouraging strong export
response. But these projections failed to materialize,
mainly because the critical mass of structural
reforms were not achieved, but also because
transmission lags to growth proved longer than
expected.



Moreover, a barrage of powerful adverse shocks
hit the economy. Diminishing support for the
program and the domestic political turmoil,
combined with a growing impatience with the slow
pace reform implementation among European
leaders, led to the growing uncertainty surrounding
Greece’s future in the euro area. The widespread
loss of confidence resulted in a large outflow of
deposits and seizing up of liquidity in the economy.
This hampered the transmission from even the
modest structural reform implementation to growth
by stifling investments. Externally, recessionary
forces in Europe proved stronger than expected,
reducing demand for Greece’s exports.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

27

GREECE

Box 1. Why Has the Recession In Greece Been So Deep? (concluded)


28

With no support to growth from structural reforms, the adverse shocks amplified the impact
of the negative fiscal impulse, creating a negative feedback loop. Fiscal targets were relaxed
only marginally in the face of weaker growth, effectively leading to additional, highly pro-cyclical
tightening. Consecutive packages of measures amounted to around 7 percent of GDP. Under
standard OECD multipliers, this would have reduced GDP growth by additional 4 percentage points
(on top of the direct impact of expectations and the liquidity squeeze on the economy), but
multipliers have likely increased when liquidity crunch associated with the confidence crisis
affected access to credit for households and businesses alike.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Box 2. External Balance Assessment (EBA)
The EBA exercise indicates that the external adjustment is not yet complete:


The EBA current account exercise suggests that further current account adjustment is needed
to restore external sustainability. The EBA estimates a current account norm of -2.5 percent of
GDP compared to 2012 cyclically-adjusted current account of around -5½ percent of GDP.
The envisaged fiscal adjustment under the program is expected to be one of the key elements
to bring the current account closer to the norm (the EBA methodology attributes about
-1 percent of GDP to the domestic fiscal balance policy gap, which is expected to close).



In the medium-term, high net external debt requires an extended period of current account
balances above the EBA norm to reduce debt to safer levels. Staff projects that a cyclicallyadjusted current account converging to a surplus of about 2 percent of GDP by 2020 would be
consistent with net external debt falling to around 70 percent of GDP by the end of the
decade. In this scenario, public debt would still be in a range where detrimental effects to
growth could occur.



The EBA REER regression yields a 9 percent overvaluation. CGER results indicate a larger
overvaluation of 24 percent (broadly consistent with the 4 percent drop in the REER from the
peak in 2009Q4 and an estimated overvaluation of 20-30 percent at the onset of the SBA in
2010), but it does not reflect the narrowing of policy gaps, which are reflected in the EBA
methodology. Given the large and ongoing structural changes to the Greek economy, these
results should be interpreted with caution.



On the basis of the envisaged product and labor market reforms and continued domestic
demand restraint, staff projects the CPI- and GDP-deflator based REERs to fall by a cumulative
10 percent by 2020. Together with the general business environment improvements that the
program’s structural reforms will deliver, these projected REER developments are consistent
with closing the competitiveness gap around 2020.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

29

GREECE

Figure 1. Greece: Revisions to Macro Projections, 2008–17
(Year-on-year percent change, unless otherwise indicated)
Real GDP has been revised down...

6

Current proj.
EFF request
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA

4
2

6

Real GDP Growth

4
2

...due to a sharp revision downward
of domestic consumption...

8

Current proj.
Real Private
EFF request
Consumption Growth
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA

6
4
2

8
6
4
2

0

0

0

-2

-2

-2

-2

-4

-4

-4

-4

-6

-6

-6

-6

-8

-8

0

-8

-8
2008

2010

2012

2014

...and investment.

20

-10

-10
2008

2016

2010

2012

2014

2016

Current account adjustment was slugish,
but has accelerated...

20

2

15

0

10

10

-2

-2

5

5

-4

-4

0

0

-6

-6

-5

-5

-8

-10

-10

-15

-12

-20

-14

-25

-16

Gross Fixed Capital Formation Growth

15

Current proj.
EFF request
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA

-10
-15
-20
-25
2008

6

2010

2012

2014

2016

...supported by recent adjustments in prices.
GDP Deflator

5

Current proj.
EFF request
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA

4
3
2

6
5

3
2

0

0

-1

-1
-2
2010

2012

2014

2016

Sources: Elstat; Bank of Greece; and IMF staff projections.

30

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

2010

2012

2014

0

-8
-10
-12
-14
-16

2016

Employment projections have
worsened with the deeper recession.

30

2

Unemployment Rate (Percent)

30

25

25

20

20

4

1

2008

Current proj.
EFF request
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA
2008

1

-2

Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP)

15

15
Current proj.
EFF request
SBA 5th review
SBA 4th review
SBA

10
5
0
2008

2010

2012

2014

10
5
0
2016

GREECE

Figure 2. Greece: Performance Among Peers, 2000–17 1/
20

Recession was delayed ,
but is now deeper than in other countries.
Real GDP Growth
(Year-on-year percent change)

20
10

10

0

0

-10

-10
Greece
-20
-30

Periphery median 2/
Baltics and IRL median 3/

-20
-30

24
20

25

General Government Primary Balance
(Percent of GDP)

25

Periphery median 2/

12

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

300

15

-25

Periphery median 2/
Baltics and IRL meidan 3/

200

50

0

0
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

15

-15

Periphery median 2/

250

50

150

100

Greece

Greece

300

100

125

-30

General Government Debt (Percent of GDP)

100

0

-15

...but the debt profile of Greece
remains far above others.

150

Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP)
0

-4

150

2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
The current account deficit has
also adjusted with a lag...

20

12

250

0

Baltics and IRL median 3/

Periphery median 2/

24

2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Greece

-25

Greece

Baltics and IRL median 3/ 16

200
0

CPI Inflation
(Year-on-year
percent change)

16

2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Fiscal adjustment has been much larger...

Price adjustments have also been delayed.

...and exports remain well below Greece's peers.
Greece

Exports (Percent of GDP)

Periphery median 2/
Baltics and IRL meidan 3/

150
125
100

75

75

50

50

25

25

-30

Baltics and IRL median 3/
-45

-45
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

0

0
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Aggregates exclude Greece. Max and min for the entire sample excluding Greece.
2/ Includes Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
3/ Includes Estonia, Ireland, Latvia, and Lithuania.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

31

GREECE

Figure 3. Greece: Labor Market Developments, 2007–12
2,000

Minimum wages have been reduced...
Minimum Wage, 2012 (Euros per month)

2,000

20
1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

500

500

0
BGR
ROM
LTU
LVA
EST
CZE
HUN
SVK
POL
HRV
PRT
MLT
GRC, '13
ESP
SVN
GRC, '11
GBR
FRA
NLD
IRL
BEL
LUX

0

3.0

But employment continues to fall,
especially in private sector services...
Employment By Sector, SA (Millions of persons)

2.5
Agriculture
Industry
Construction
Public sector
Other services

2.0
1.5
1.0

25
15

...facilitating further wage
declines in the private sector.

25

Wages (Year-on-year
percent change)

20
15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

Overall

-10

-15

Private

-15

-20

Public

-20

-25

-25
2007

3.0

30

2.5

25

2.0

20

1.5

15

1.0

10

0.5

5

0.0

0

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

...and unemployment is on the rise, despite wage
declines and a low participation rate...
Unemployment and Participation Rates (Percent)

71

Unemployment rate
70

Participation rate (rhs)

69

68
0.5
0.0
2007

102

2008

2009

2010

2011

...and despite increasing flexibility in employment.
Hours Worked and Part-time Employment

100

10
8

98
6

96
94

4
Hours worked per
employee 1/ (2007=100)

92
90

2

Part-time employment rate
(rhs)

88
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0
2012

Sources: Elstat; Eurostat; Haver; and IMF staff calculations.

32

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

67
2007

2012

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Unemployment among youths
is of particular concern.

70

70

Unemployment Rate, SA (Percent)
Overall

60

60

50

Youth (under 25)

50

40

Long-term (greater
than one year)

40

30

30

20

20

10

10
0

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

GREECE

Outward reorientation of the economy
has been costly in terms of output.

15

15

Large Domestic Demand
Contractions in
OECD and EMs Under Pegs

10
5

10
5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20

-20

GRC

Ratio of growth to change in trade
balance (percent)

Real GDP growth (y-o-y percent change)

Figure 4. Greece: Restoring Growth

0

10
20
30
Change in trade balance (percent of GDP)

0

15
10
5
0

-1

-5
-10

-2
GRC

-3

-15
-20
-25

0
50
100
150
Doing business ranking at beginning of domestic
demand contraction (rank out of 185)

40

Product and labor market reforms are
projected to contribute to the recovery.

1

Large Domestic Demand
Contractions in
OECD and EMs Under Pegs

-4

-25

-25

2

The high sacrifice ratio can be
explained by structural rigidities.

The cumulative effect on
Greece's output is sizeable.

8

5

4

4

0

0

3

-4

-4

2

2

-8

1

1

-12

0

8

Real GDP Growth
(Year-on-year percent change)

4

Labor and product market reforms
Labor market reforms only
Baseline (no reforms)

-8
-12
2001

1

2004

2007

2010

2013

2016

2019

And product market reforms will reduce prices.
Inflation (Cumulative deviation from reform
baseline in percent)

1

-1

-1

-3
-4

4
3

0

-2
Program labor market
reforms only
Program labor and product
market reforms

Program labor and
product market reforms

5
4
3

0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

0

-2

Real GDP Growth (Cumulative deviation from
reform baseline in percent)
Program labor market
reforms only

-3

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Current Account (Deviation from reform baseline
in percent)

2
1

2

0

1

-1

0

-2

-1

-3

-2

-4
-5

-3
-4

-4

The effect of reforms on CA is positive, but
investment needs will drive up demand.

-5

Program labor market reforms only
Program labor and product market reforms

-6
-7

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff estimates.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

33

GREECE

Figure 5. Financial Sector: Supporting the Recovery
Credit projections show that credit will continue to
contract, even as the economy begins to expand.

However, firms could sustain investment in the
short term through accumulated savings.

6

8

4

7

2

6

6

0

5

5

-2

-2

4

4

-4

-4

3

3

-6

-6

2

2

-8

-8

1

1

-10

0

6

GDP and Private Sector Credit Growth
(Year-on-year percent change)
Confidence band

4
2

Real GDP
Nominal GDP

0

Baseline

-10
2011

70

2012

2013

2014

2015

Funding Structure of the Banking System
(Consolidated balance sheet, percent of total
liabilities)

50

70

35

60

30

8
7

0
2010

2016

Banks face constraints on the funding side as they
try to reduce reliance on central bank financing.

60

Corporate Sector Net Lending
(Quarterly flows in billions of euros)

2011

2012

They also face constraints on capital,
as NPLs continue to rise.

70

NPL and Coverage Ratios
NPL ratios

60

Coverage ratio (rhs)

50

25

40

20

40

30

15

30

20

20

10

20

10

10

5

10

0

0

Liabilities to Bank of Greece

40

Liabilities to credit institutions
Overnight and short-term deposits

30

Long-term deposits

0
2008

20

2009

2010

2011

2012

The potential for deposit return seems high, if
confidence in the banking sector is instilled.
Nonfinancial Corporation and Household
Leveraging (Cumulative from 2010Q1 in
trillions of euros)

0

-20

2013

20

0

0
2006

2007

-40

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Correct policies could reduce
recapitalization needs significantly.
Impact of Policies and Parameters on Envelope
(Percent)
Financial sector
envelope
Deterioration
of Macro env.
since 2012…
150

-20

-40

50

Doubling of
NPLs in TCIs

100
50

Impact on
envelope

Lifting of
foreclosure
moratorium

0
-60

-60

Net lending/borrowing
Net credit/deposits

-80

Cost of
funding similar
to 2010

-80
2010

2011

2012

Sources: Elstat; Bank of Greece; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

34

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Reduce LGDs
by 10% across
loan books
No further
NPL Growth

GREECE

Figure 6. Advancing Fiscal Adjustment

50

Cyclically-Adjusted Tax Revenue, 2010
(Percent of GDP)

60
50

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

ROM
SVK
BGR
LTU
LVA
IRL
GRC
PRT
POL
ESP
MLT
CZE
CYP
GBR
EST
LUX
SVN
DEU
HUN
NLD
AUT
ITA
FRA
FIN
BEL
SWE
DNK

30

60

While the large number of
micro-businesses and self employed....
Small Business and Self-Employment
(Percent of total employment)

40

8

20
10

12
10
8

Minimum income

2

2

0

0

60
50
40
30

0
Hair
Bar Clothing Car Plumbers Real
estate
dressers owners retailers repair
brokers
shops

Self-Employed, 2011

Greece VAT
Greece CIT
E.U. CIT 2/
E.U. VAT 2/

Average Declared Income of Self-Employed by
Industry (Thousands of euros)

10

10

Actual Tax Collection Relative to Tax Rate
(Percent)

...makes evasion easier.

4

20

This results in low efficiency of tax collection.

0
Avg. Tax Wedge 1/

4

20

30

0

6

30

40

10

6

30

Small Business
Employment, 2010

10

10

Greece

30
20

60

40

0

Greece

20

12

50

50
40

Sample average

30

70

Sample average

50

40

VAT Rates

50

60

Tax Rates and Tax Wedge, 2012 (Percent)

40

40

70

High VAT rates and tax wedge create
strong incentives to evade taxes.

50

Change in Revenue

60

Tax revenue in Greece is low
by international standards.

Elec.

Bakers

Experience in EU countries suggests that cost reducing
tax administration reforms yield revenue gains.
4
Efficiency Improvement
3 in Revenue Administration
in EU Countries, 2005-09
2
(Percent of GDP)
1

4
3
2
1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

20

-3

-3

10

-4
-0.20

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

-4
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Change in Revenue Administration Costs

Sources: European Commission; Eurostat; OECD; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Tax wedge for one family earner with two children.
2/ Unweighted average.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

35

GREECE

Table 1. Greece: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009–14
2009

2010

2011

2013

2012
Prog.

2014

Proj.

Est.

(Percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
Real GDP
Output gap (percent of pot. output)
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Change in stocks (contribution)
Foreign balance (contribution)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Unemployment rate (percent) 1/
Employment 1/
Unit labor costs
Consumer prices (national definition), period averag
Consumer prices (HICP), period average
Core prices, period average 2/
GDP deflator

-3.1
7.3
-5.5
-1.6
4.9
-13.7
-1.2
3.0
-19.4
-20.2
9.4
-1.0
4.2
1.2
1.3

-4.9
3.3
-7.0
-6.2
-8.7
-15.0
0.7
3.0
5.2
-6.2
12.5
-2.7
-1.1
4.7
4.7

-7.1
-2.6
-8.7
-7.7
-5.2
-19.6
-0.4
2.4
0.3
-7.3
17.5
-6.6
-3.9
3.3
3.1

2.3
2.3

2.6
1.1

1.1
1.0

-6.0
-7.3
-8.7
-7.7
-6.2
-14.4
0.4
3.3
-1.2
-11.5
24.4
-9.2
-8.1
1.2
...
...

-6.4
-7.7
-10.4
-9.1
-4.2
-19.2
0.0
3.7
-2.4
-13.8
24.2
-8.2
-6.1
1.5
1.0
-0.3

-4.2
-10.6
-5.6
-6.9
-4.0
-4.0
0.4
2.6
3.0
-6.4
27.0
-3.7
-6.5
-0.8
...
...

0.6
-9.5
-1.1
-1.6
-6.2
8.4
0.0
1.7
4.6
-1.9
26.0
0.6
-1.5
-0.4
...
...

-0.5

-0.8

-1.1

-0.4

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
Current account
Structural current account balance
Trade balance
Export of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Total transfers
Net income receipts
Net international investment position

-11.2
-7.0
-7.8

-10.1
-8.3
-6.8

-9.9
-10.9
-6.0

-4.2
...
-2.5

-3.4
-5.4
-2.5

-0.8
-4.9
-0.2

-0.2
-3.6
1.4

18.3
-26.2
0.6
-3.9
-86.4

20.5
-27.3
0.1
-3.5
-98.4

23.4
-29.5
0.3
-4.1
-86.1

25.3
-27.8
0.3
-2.0
-94.2

25.4
-27.9
0.7
-1.6
-114.1

27.4
-27.6
1.8
-2.5
-118.9

28.3
-26.9
1.5
-3.1
-117

Public finances (general government)
Total revenues
Total expenditures
Primary expenditures
Overall balance
Primary balance
Cyclically-adjusted primary balance
Gross debt

38.3
54.0
48.8
-15.6
-10.5
-13.0
130

40.6
51.4
45.5
-10.8
-4.9
-6.1
148

42.4
52.0
44.8
-9.6
-2.4
-1.3
170

43.6
50.3
45.1
-6.7
-1.5
...
158

44.1
50.4
45.4
-6.3
-1.3
2.2
157

44.3
48.4
44.3
-4.1
0.0
5.0
176

43.7
46.9
42.2
-3.2
1.5
5.9
174

5.1
4.2

6.1
0.0

6.8
-3.1

...
-7.2

5.8
-4.0

6.4
-6.5

...
-4.0

0.4
1.7

-3.7
-1.2

0.0
-0.7

-0.5
-1.9

1.1

0.8

-6.1

...
...
...

-8.4

0.1
-2.1
-8.4

...
...
...

231
-0.9

222
-3.9

209
-6.1

195
-6.5

194
-7.1

183
-5.3

184
0.2

Interest rates and credit
Lending interest rate (percent)3/
Private credit growth (percent change) 4/
Exchange rates, end-period (percent change) 3/
Nominal effective exchange rate
Real effective exchange rate (CPI-based)
Real effective exchange rate (man. ULC-based)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of euros)
Nominal GDP (percent change)

Sources: National Statistical Service; Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of Greece; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Based on Labor Force Survey.
2/ Core prices exclude energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco.
3/ Data for 2013 as of March.
4/ Includes securitized or otherwise transferred loans from 2010 onward.

36

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Table 2. Greece: Medium-Term Macro Framework, 2012–18
2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Proj.

Est.

(Percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
Real GDP
Output gap (percent of pot. output)
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Change in stocks (contribution)
Foreign balance (contribution)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Unemployment rate (percent) 1/
Employment
Unit labor costs
Consumer prices (national defintion), period average
Consumer prices (HICP), period average
GDP deflator
Monetary survey
Private credit growth (percent change) 2/
Private sector deposit growth (percent change)
Liabilities to the Bank of Greece (billions of Euro)

-6.4
-7.7
-10.4
-9.1
-4.2
-19.2
0.0
3.7
-2.4
-13.8
24.2
-8.2
-6.1
1.5
1.0

-4.2
-10.6
-5.6
-6.9
-4.0
-4.0
0.4
2.6
3.0
-6.4
27.0
-3.7
-6.5
-0.8

0.6
-9.5
-1.1
-1.6
-6.2
8.4
0.0
1.7
4.6
-1.9
26.0
0.6
-1.5
-0.4

2.9
-6.9
1.7
1.4
-4.8
11.3
0.0
1.2
5.5
1.2
24.0
2.6
-0.3
0.3

3.7
-4.5
3.2
2.2
-4.0
14.4
0.0
0.6
4.7
2.7
21.0
4.0
1.7
1.1

3.5
-2.7
3.2
1.8
3.2
8.5
0.0
0.4
4.1
3.1
18.6
3.0
1.4
1.2

3.3
-1.0
3.0
1.5
3.7
7.4
0.0
0.4
4.3
3.2
16.3
2.7
1.6
1.3

-0.8

...
-1.1

...
-0.4

...
0.4

...
1.1

...
1.3

...
1.4

-4.0
-7.0
121.2

-6.5
1.3
81.5

-4.0
1.0
66.9

-2.2
3.4
51.0

-0.6
5.0
35.0

5.3
5.0
27.7

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
Current account
Structural current account balance
Trade balance
Export of goods and services
Export of goods
Exports of services
Imports of goods and services
Imports of goods
Imports of services
Total transfers
Net income receipts
Net international investment position
Gross external debt
Private sector capital flows (net)
Public finances (general government)
Total revenues
Total expenditures 3/
Primary expenditures 3/
Overall balance
Primary balance
Cyclically-adjusted primary balance
Privatization receipts
Gross debt

-3.4
-5.4
-2.5

-0.8
-4.9
-0.2

-0.2
-3.6
1.4

0.1
-2.1
2.4

0.2
-0.8
3.0

0.5
0.1
3.5

0.9
1.0
3.9

25.4
11.4
14.0
-27.9
-21.5
-6.4
0.7
-1.6
-114.1
232.8
-21.5

27.4
12.1
15.3
-27.6
-21.3
-6.3
1.8
-2.5
-118.9
247.0
-14.2

28.3
12.4
15.9
-26.9
-20.8
-6.1
1.5
-3.1
-116.9
238.1
5.1

28.6
12.4
16.3
-26.2
-20.2
-6.0
1.2
-3.5
-111.3
222.2
5.1

28.7
12.2
16.4
-25.7
-19.7
-6.0
0.9
-3.7
-104.3
204.7
4.5

28.9
12.2
16.6
-25.4
-19.5
-5.9
0.7
-3.7
-96.9
190.6
0.7

29.1
12.3
16.9
-25.2
-19.3
-5.9
0.4
-3.4
-89.1
176.6
0.8

44.1
50.4
45.4
-6.3
-1.3
2.2
0.1
156.9

44.3
48.4
44.3
-4.1
0.0
5.0
1.4
175.8

43.7
46.9
42.2
-3.2
1.5
5.9
1.0
174.2

42.7
44.8
39.7
-2.1
3.0
6.0
1.1
168.2

42.0
42.7
37.5
-0.7
4.5
6.4
1.1
159.5

42.0
42.6
37.5
-0.6
4.5
5.6
1.1
149.7

42.0
42.8
37.7
-0.8
4.3
4.7
1.5
140.9

Sources: National Statistical Service; Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of Greece; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Based on Labor Force Survey.
2/ Projections do not take into account write-offs, valuation changes, or reclassifications.
3/ Includes unidentified measures.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

37

GREECE

Table 3. Greece: General Government: Statement of Operations (GFSM 2001, flows),
2010–16 1/
(Millions of euros)
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

90,232
45,109
29,764
15,359

88,383
44,917
27,435
16,031

85,458
43,644
26,508
15,306

81,243
42,264
24,666
14,313

80,265
41,714
25,220
13,331

81,205
42,259
25,127
13,819

83,675
43,802
25,790
14,082

114,289
114,472
27,773
13,429
5,386
13,193
129
47,476
7,086
-183
5,203
5,386

108,346
111,332
25,852
9,789
5,782
15,016
982
47,450
6,461
-2,986
2,796
5,782

97,655
100,264
24,215
9,456
6,263
9,723
977
44,383
5,247
-2,609
3,654
6,263

88,807
….
21,184
7,583
….
7,527
1,090
39,957
3,130
….
8,337
….

86,313
….
20,365
6,919
….
8,745
478
38,513
2,772
….
8,520
….

88,484
….
20,175
7,069
….
9,786
212
39,251
2,725
….
9,265
….

89,403
….
19,895
6,999
….
10,524
375
40,010
2,652
….
8,948
….

Unidentified Measures (Cumulative)

0

0

0

37

60

3,195

4,173

Gross operating balance 3/
Net operating balance 4/
Net lending (+)/borrowing (–) 5/
Primary Net lending (+)/borrowing (–)

-18,854
-24,240
-24,057
-10,864

-17,167
-22,949
-19,963
-4,947

-8,543
-14,806
-12,197
-2,474

810
….
-7,527
0

2,532
….
-5,988
2,758

5,181
….
-4,084
5,702

7,392
….
-1,556
8,969

Net acquisition of financial assets
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts receivable

4,798
0
5,097
0
144
380
4
0
-827

356
0
-2,012
-48
832
652
1
0
931

52,061
0
4,979
13,535
-4,995
38,036
1
0
505

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

Net incurrence of liabilities
SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts payable

28,695
0
-503
-311
30,216
0
0
951
-1,658

20,057
0
-184
-2,981
26,907
0
0
166
-3,851

64,525
0
-46
-44,744
107,811
0
0
-1,499
3,003

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
….

Revenue
Taxes
Social contributions
Grants and other revenue
Expenditure
Expense
Compensation of employees
Use of goods and services
Consumption of fixed capital
Interest
Subsidies
Social benefits
Grants and other expense
Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets
Gross capital formation 2/
(-) Consumption of fixed capital

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections
1/ Calculations based on program definitions as outlined in the TMU.
2/ Acquisition less disposals of nonfinancial assets.
3/ Revenue minus expense (excluding consumption of fixed capital).
4/ Revenue minus expense (including consumption of fixed capital).
5/ Revenue minus expenditure.

38

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Table 4. Greece: Financial Balance Sheet (GFSM 2001, stocks), 2008–12 1/
(Millions of euros)
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

….
….
-221,099

….
….
-242,350

….
….
-211,112

….
….
-153,297

….
….
-198,700

Financial assets
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts receivable

64,412
0
13,213
702
1,591
29,256
38
0
19,612

77,232
0
11,764
741
5,261
39,757
42
0
19,667

79,471
0
16,901
741
5,407
37,533
47
0
18,842

75,756
0
14,732
693
6,238
34,270
48
0
19,775

121,573
0
20,707
14,196
1,243
65,097
49
0
20,281

Liabilities
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts payable

285,511
0
728
213,617
45,912
0
0
2,736
22,518

319,582
0
1,508
248,184
44,811
0
0
980
24,099

290,583
0
1,005
190,632
75,193
0
0
1,311
22,442

229,053
0
820
104,586
102,921
0
0
2,134
18,592

320,273
0
774
78,128
216,240
0
0
3,536
21,595

Memorandum items:
Debt (at market value)
Debt at face value
Maastricht debt

282,775
285,802
263,284

318,602
323,784
299,685

289,272
351,957
329,515

226,919
373,764
355,172

316,737
325,513
303,918

….
….
-5,405

….
….
15,093

….
….
55,135

….
….
77,516

….
….
-25,729

Financial assets
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts receivable

-13,417
0
48
0
-2
-13,461
-1
0
-1

10,552
0
-67
0
0
10,619
-1
0
1

-2,559
0
40
0
2
-2,604
1
0
2

-4,071
0
-157
0
-1
-3,915
0
0
2

966
0
-223
-32
0
1,220
0
0
1

Liabilities
Monetary gold and SDRs
Currency and deposits
Debt securities
Loans
Equity and investment fund shares
Insurance, pensions, and standardized guarantee schemes
Financial derivatives and employee stock options
Other accounts payable

-8,012
0
0
-7,067
6
0
0
-950
-1

-4,541
0
57
-3,353
-11
0
0
-1,234
0

-57,694
0
0
-57,241
166
0
0
-620
1

-81,587
0
-1
-83,065
821
0
0
657
1

26,695
0
0
18,286
5,508
0
0
2,901
0

Stock positions
Net worth
Nonfinancial assets
Net financial worth

Other economic flows
Change in net worth from other economic flows
Nonfinancial assets
Change in net financial worth from other economic flows

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Calculations based on program definitions as outlined in the TMU.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

39

GREECE

Table 5: Greece: General Government Operations, 2010–17 1/
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Proj.
(Billions of euros)
90.2
27.3
17.5
29.8
4.9
6.1
4.6

88.4
26.6
18.0
27.4
5.7
5.6
5.0

85.5
24.3
19.1
26.5
4.7
5.8
4.9

81.2
23.5
18.7
24.7
5.3
4.6
4.4

80.3
23.2
18.5
25.2
5.1
4.4
3.8

81.2
23.7
18.6
25.1
5.3
4.6
3.9

83.7
25.0
18.8
25.8
5.5
4.8
3.8

87.8
26.2
19.7
27.1
5.8
5.0
4.0

101.1
47.5
0.1
3.4
27.8
13.4
8.9

93.3
47.5
1.0
2.6
25.9
9.8
6.7

87.9
44.4
1.0
2.3
24.2
9.5
6.6

81.3
40.0
1.1
2.5
21.2
7.6
8.9

77.6
38.5
0.5
2.4
20.4
6.9
8.9

78.7
39.3
0.2
2.4
20.2
7.1
9.6

78.9
40.0
0.4
2.4
19.9
7.0
9.2

82.7
42.0
0.4
2.5
20.9
7.3
9.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.2

4.2

4.4

Interest
Overall balance

-10.9
13.2
-24.1

-4.9
15.0
-20.0

-2.5
9.7
-12.2

0.0
7.5
-7.5

2.8
8.7
-6.0

5.7
9.8
-4.1

9.0
10.5
-1.6

9.4
11.0
-1.6

Gross debt (Maastricht)

329.5

355.2

303.9

322.5

320.3

319.8

317.9

312.9

Revenue
Indirect taxes
Direct taxes
Social contributions
Other current revenue
Sales
Capital revenue
Primary expenditure
Social benefits
Subsidies
Other current expenditure
Compensation of employees
Intermediate consumption
Investment
Unidentified measures (cumulative)
Primary balance

(Percent of GDP)
Total primary revenue
Indirect taxes
Direct taxes
Social contributions
Other current revenue
Sales
Capital revenue

40.6
12.3
7.9
13.4
2.2
2.7
2.1

42.4
12.8
8.6
13.2
2.7
2.7
2.4

44.1
12.6
9.9
13.7
2.4
3.0
2.5

44.3
12.8
10.2
13.4
2.9
2.5
2.4

43.7
12.6
10.1
13.7
2.8
2.4
2.1

42.7
12.5
9.8
13.2
2.8
2.4
2.1

42.0
12.5
9.4
12.9
2.8
2.4
1.9

42.0
12.5
9.4
12.9
2.8
2.4
1.9

Total primary expenditure
Social benefits
Subsidies
Other current expenditure
Compensation of employees
Intermediate consumption
Investment

45.5
21.4
0.1
1.5
12.5
6.0
4.0

44.8
22.8
0.5
1.2
12.4
4.7
3.2

45.4
22.9
0.5
1.2
12.5
4.9
3.4

44.3
21.8
0.6
1.4
11.5
4.1
4.9

42.2
20.9
0.3
1.3
11.1
3.8
4.8

41.4
20.7
0.1
1.2
10.6
3.7
5.1

39.6
20.1
0.2
1.2
10.0
3.5
4.6

39.6
20.1
0.2
1.2
10.0
3.5
4.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.7

2.1

2.1

Interest
Overall balance

-4.89
5.9
-10.8

-2.37
7.2
-9.6

-1.28
5.0
-6.3

0.00
4.1
-4.1

1.50
4.8
-3.3

3.00
5.1
-2.1

4.50
5.3
-0.8

4.50
5.3
-0.8

Gross debt (Maastricht)

148.3

170.3

156.9

175.8

174.2

168.2

159.5

149.7

Nominal GDP (billions of euros)

222.2

208.5

193.8

183.5

183.9

190.1

199.3

209.1

Unidentified measures (cumulative)
Primary balance

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Calculations based on program definitions as outlined in the TMU.

40

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Table 6. Greece: Summary of Balance of Payments, 2010–18
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Proj.
(Billions of euro)
Current account balance
Balance of goods and services
Goods balance
Exports
Imports
Services balance
Credit
Debit
Income balance
Credit
Debit
Current transfers (net)

-22.5
-15.0
-28.3
17.1
45.4
13.2
28.5
15.2
-7.7
4.0
11.7
0.2

-20.6
-12.6
-27.2
20.2
47.5
14.6
28.6
14.0
-8.6
3.3
11.9
0.6

-6.5
-4.9
-19.6
22.0
41.6
14.7
27.1
12.4
-3.1
3.3
6.3
1.4

-1.6
-0.3
-16.9
22.2
39.1
16.6
28.1
11.5
-4.7
3.8
8.5
3.4

-0.4
2.6
-15.4
22.8
38.2
18.0
29.3
11.2
-5.7
4.2
9.9
2.7

0.2
4.6
-14.9
23.5
38.4
19.5
30.9
11.4
-6.6
4.6
11.2
2.2

0.4
5.9
-15.0
24.4
39.4
20.9
32.7
11.9
-7.3
5.1
12.3
1.8

0.9
7.2
-15.1
25.6
40.7
22.4
34.8
12.4
-7.7
5.7
13.4
1.5

1.9
8.6
-15.4
26.9
42.3
24.0
37.0
13.0
-7.5
6.1
13.6
0.8

Capital and financial account balance
Capital account balance
Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Of which: government

-8.6
2.1
-10.6
-0.9
-20.9
-26.8
11.0
0.1

-21.0
2.7
-23.7
-0.5
-19.8
-23.3
-3.4
0.0

-103.4
2.3
-105.7
2.3
-99.9
-57.0
-8.1
0.0

-33.2
4.6
-37.9
2.3
-2.8
6.2
-37.3
0.0

-15.2
3.5
-18.7
1.8
-9.0
-9.1
-11.4
0.0

-7.0
3.2
-10.3
1.9
-5.4
-6.1
-6.8
0.0

-3.0
3.3
-6.3
1.8
-2.1
-2.7
-6.0
0.0

-4.9
3.3
-8.2
2.2
-3.5
-4.7
-6.8
0.0

-5.0
2.8
-7.8
3.0
0.2
-0.9
-11.0
0.0

Net errors and omissions

-0.4

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Program financing, net

31.5

41.5

109.9

34.8

11.0

0.3

2.6

3.9

3.1

Unidentified financing

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4.6

6.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

Other investment (excl. program financing)
Reserve assets (increase = -)

(Percent of GDP)
Current account balance
Balance on goods and services
Goods balance
Services balance
Income balance
Current transfers

-10.1
-6.8
-12.7
6.0
-3.5
0.1

-9.9
-6.0
-13.1
7.0
-4.1
0.3

-3.4
-2.5
-10.1
7.6
-1.6
0.7

-0.8
-0.2
-9.2
9.0
-2.5
1.8

-0.2
1.4
-8.4
9.8
-3.1
1.5

0.1
2.4
-7.8
10.2
-3.5
1.2

0.2
3.0
-7.5
10.5
-3.7
0.9

0.5
3.5
-7.2
10.7
-3.7
0.7

0.9
3.9
-7.0
11.0
-3.4
0.4

Capital and financial account balance
Capital account balance
Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Of which: government

-3.9
0.9
-4.8
-0.4
-9.4
-12.1
5.0
0.0

-10.1
1.3
-11.3
-0.2
-9.5
-11.2
-1.7
0.0

-53.4
1.2
-54.6
1.2
-51.6
-29.4
-4.2
0.0

-18.1
2.5
-20.6
1.2
-1.5
3.4
-20.4
0.0

-8.3
1.9
-10.1
1.0
-4.9
-4.9
-6.2
0.0

-3.7
1.7
-5.4
1.0
-2.8
-3.2
-3.6
0.0

-1.5
1.7
-3.2
0.9
-1.1
-1.4
-3.0
0.0

-2.3
1.6
-3.9
1.0
-1.7
-2.2
-3.3
0.0

-2.3
1.3
-3.6
1.4
0.1
-0.4
-5.0
0.0

Net errors and omissions

-0.2

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Program financing

14.2

19.9

56.7

19.0

6.0

0.2

1.3

1.9

1.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.5

3.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

213.1
150.9
62.2

225.4
173.5
51.9

232.8
183.3
49.5

247.0
196.0
51.0

238.1
187.9
50.2

222.2
173.8
48.4

204.7
158.5
46.2

190.6
146.8
43.8

176.6
134.7
42.0

-10.1
-8.3

-9.9
-10.9

-3.4
-5.4

-0.4
-4.9

0.8
-3.6

2.1
-2.1

2.5
-0.8

3.0
0.1

3.5
1.0

Other investment
Reserve assets (increase = -)

Unidentified official financing / market access
Gross external debt
Public sector
Private sector
Memorandum item:
Current account balance in cash terms
Structural current account balance
Sources: Bank of Greece; and IMF staff estimates.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

41

GREECE

Table 7. Greece: Monetary Survey, 2010–14
2010

2011

2013

2012
Mar-13

Jun-13

2014
Sep-13

Dec-13

Mar-14

Jun-14

Sep-14

Dec-14

Proj.
(Billions of Euros)
Aggregated balance sheet of Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs)
Total assets
Cash (held by credit institutions)
Claims on Bank of Greece
Claims on other MFIs
Claims (Loans) on non MFIs
Domestic
General government
Other sectors 1/
Other countries
Securities 2/
Other assets
Fixed assets

654.6
2.1
10.6
186.0
289.0
282.5
26.3
256.2
6.5
101.2
60.7
5.0

646.1
2.4
5.1
146.8
275.9
269.5
22.3
247.2
6.4
93.0
117.9
5.0

602.5
2.5
3.1
170.7
250.1
244.8
17.4
227.5
5.2
100.4
70.6
5.0

558.5
2.0
4.2
130.9
249.3
243.6
15.3
228.2
5.7
99.8
67.4
4.9

541.4
2.0
3.5
129.0
240.2
235.1
14.6
220.5
5.2
96.9
65.2
4.6

526.7
1.9
3.4
124.2
232.8
227.7
14.0
213.7
5.2
95.5
64.3
4.5

520.9
1.9
3.4
122.0
229.6
224.5
13.9
210.6
5.1
95.3
64.2
4.5

512.4
1.9
3.4
117.6
226.6
221.6
13.8
207.7
5.1
94.5
63.9
4.5

505.6
1.9
3.4
113.8
224.3
219.3
13.8
205.4
5.1
93.9
63.9
4.5

499.5
1.9
3.4
109.8
222.5
217.4
13.9
203.6
5.1
93.5
64.0
4.5

494.4
1.9
3.4
106.1
221.2
216.1
13.9
202.2
5.1
93.2
64.2
4.5

Total Liabilities
Liabilities to Bank of Greece
Liabilities to other MFIs
Deposits and repos of non MFIs
Domestic
Other countries
Capital and reserves
Banknotes and coins in circulation
Other liabilities

654.6
97.8
164.7
282.5
225.1
57.4
46.7
22.5
40.3

646.1
76.9
155.4
237.5
187.7
49.8
54.8
23.7
97.8

602.5
121.2
133.2
225.2
179.1
46.1
56.0
24.3
42.6

558.5
92.0
109.3
227.2
186.0
41.2
59.8
23.9
46.3

541.4
88.8
108.7
223.7
182.1
41.6
58.2
23.3
38.8

526.7
83.9
103.9
221.1
180.2
40.8
57.0
22.8
38.0

520.9
81.5
101.6
220.9
180.4
40.6
56.6
22.6
37.7

512.4
77.6
97.6
220.2
179.7
40.5
56.9
22.5
37.6

505.6
74.1
94.1
220.1
179.6
40.5
57.3
22.5
37.6

499.5
70.5
90.4
220.7
180.2
40.5
57.8
22.5
37.6

494.4
66.9
86.9
221.8
181.2
40.7
58.4
22.6
37.7

Broad money
Credit to the private sector 3/ 4/
Credit to government 3/

232.9
257.5
63.0

199.2
248.1
59.1

188.4
227.3
28.2

193.7
228.0
22.5

191.4
220.5
22.8

189.5
213.7
22.3

189.6
210.6
22.4

189.3
207.7
22.3

189.6
205.4
22.3

190.5
203.6
22.3

191.9
202.2
22.3

Broad money
Domestic private sector deposits
Credit to the private sector 3/ 4/
Credit to government 3/

-11.2
-12.4
0.0
28.3

-14.6
-17.0
-3.1
2.0

-5.3
-7.0
-4.0
-7.9

1.5
0.9
-3.5
-17.0

0.6
1.3
-6.5
-20.8

-2.2
-2.0
-8.8
-0.9

-1.0
-1.1
-6.8
-2.3

0.5
0.3
-4.8
-0.1

1.2
1.0
-4.0
-0.1

103.5
98.4
115.0
12.2

103.6
98.4
113.7
12.2

103.8
98.4
112.5
12.2

104.2
98.5
111.3
12.2

104.6
98.7
110.1
12.2

5.6
103.5
1.0

5.9
102.5
1.0

6.1
101.4
1.0

6.3
100.3
1.0

6.5
99.2
1.0

Money and credit

(Annual percentage change) 5/
8.6
9.8
-5.0
-15.0

4.9
6.0
-5.6
-24.6

(Percent of GDP)
Broad money
Domestic deposits
Credit to the private sector 4/
Credit to government

101.8
98.4
112.6
27.6

89.5
84.3
111.4
26.6

89.1
84.7
107.5
13.4

97.8
93.9
115.1
11.4

101.0
96.1
116.3
12.0

(Percent)

Memorandum items:
Capital to assets
Loans to customer deposits
Velocity

102.7
97.7
115.9
12.1

5.8
103.5
1.0

6.9
117.0
1.1

5.7
111.6
1.1

5.8
110.3
1.0

5.7
107.1
1.0

5.7
104.9
1.0

Sources: Bank of Greece; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ As of June 2010, securitised assets are no longer derecognised from the balance sheet of banks that have adopted the International Accounting Standards.
The counterpart of these assets is recorded on the liabilities side as deposit liabilities to non-euro area residents.
2/ Holdings of securities other than shares and derivatives.
3/ Projected growth rates are calculated from differences in outstanding amounts and do not take into account write-offs, valuation changes, or
reclassifications.
4/ Credit to domestic non-MFI residents by domestic MFIs excluding the Bank of Greece, including securitized loans and corporate bonds.

42

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Table 8. Greece: Monetary Financial Institutions (excl. BoG)—Uses and Sources of Funds,
2010–16
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.
(Billions of euros)
Assets
Cash
Claims on other MFIs
Claims on non-MFIs
General government
Private sector 1/
Corporate
Households
Other countries
Other assets

515.0
2.1
88.9
354.8
63.0
255.8
116.5
139.3
36.0
69.1

476.9
2.4
68.7
338.4
59.1
246.8
113.0
133.8
32.4
67.4

442.2
2.5
48.3
321.3
28.2
227.1
100.8
126.3
66.0
70.0

408.6
1.9
40.5
299.9
22.4
210.6
97.1
113.5
66.9
66.4

396.6
1.9
39.1
289.3
22.3
202.2
95.3
106.8
64.8
66.3

394.4
2.0
39.0
284.9
23.1
197.7
95.3
102.4
64.1
68.5

398.7
2.1
39.4
285.4
24.2
196.6
96.8
99.8
64.5
71.8

Liabilities
Liabilities to other MFIs
Deposits of non-MFIs
Central government
Private sector
Other countries 2/
Other liabilities
Capital and reserves
Eurosystem liquidity support

515.0
66.3
280.2
9.0
213.9
57.4
26.3
44.4
97.8

476.9
44.5
232.3
4.1
178.7
49.5
18.1
53.1
128.9

442.2
31.7
218.9
7.1
166.2
45.6
17.2
53.2
121.2

408.6
34.6
215.7
7.2
168.4
40.1
24.3
52.5
81.5

396.6
34.5
216.6
6.4
170.0
40.2
24.3
54.3
66.9

394.4
35.5
225.0
6.4
175.8
42.8
25.1
57.8
51.0

398.7
37.0
237.9
7.2
184.5
46.2
26.3
62.5
35.0

(Percent of GDP)
Assets
Cash
Claims on other MFIs
Claims on non-MFIs
General government
Private sector 1/
Corporate
Households
Other countries
Other assets

231.8
1.0
40.0
159.7
28.4
115.2
52.4
62.7
16.2
31.1

228.7
1.1
33.0
162.3
28.4
118.4
54.2
64.2
15.6
32.3

228.2
1.3
24.9
165.8
14.6
117.2
52.0
65.2
34.1
36.2

223.0
1.0
22.1
163.7
12.2
115.0
53.0
62.0
36.5
36.2

216.1
1.0
21.3
157.6
12.2
110.1
51.9
58.2
35.3
36.1

207.9
1.0
20.6
150.2
12.2
104.3
50.3
54.0
33.8
36.1

200.4
1.0
19.8
143.5
12.2
98.9
48.7
50.2
32.4
36.1

Liabilities
Liabilities to other MFIs
Deposits of non-MFIs
Central government
Private sector
Other countries 2/
Other liabilities
Capital and reserves
Eurosystem liquidity support

231.8
29.8
126.1
4.0
96.3
25.8
11.8
20.0
44.0

228.7
21.4
111.4
2.0
85.7
23.7
8.7
25.4
61.8

228.2
16.4
113.0
3.7
85.8
23.5
8.9
27.5
62.5

223.0
18.9
117.7
3.9
91.9
21.9
13.2
28.7
44.5

216.1
18.8
118.0
3.5
92.6
21.9
13.2
29.6
36.5

207.9
18.7
118.6
3.4
92.7
22.6
13.2
30.5
26.9

200.4
18.6
119.6
3.6
92.8
23.2
13.2
31.4
17.6

Memorandum items:
Domestic private sector deposit growth (percent)
Private credit growth (percent change) 3/
Eurosystem liquidity support (percent of total assets)

-12.4
0.0
19.0

-17.0
-3.1
27.0

-7.0
-4.0
27.4

1.3
-6.5
20.0

1.0
-4.0
16.9

3.4
-2.2
12.9

5.0
-0.6
8.8

Sources: Bank of Greece; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ As of June 2010, securitised assets are no longer derecognised from the balance sheet of banks that have adopted the
International Accounting Standards. The counterpart of these assets is recorded on the liabilities side as deposit liabilities to non-euro
area residents.
2/ June 2010 reclassification related to liabilities associated with assets disposed of in a securitisation but still recognised on the
statistical balance sheet.
3/ Projections do not take into account write-offs, valuation changes, or reclassifications.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

43

Table 9. Greece: Core Set of Financial Soundness Indicators for Deposit Taking Institutions,
2009–12
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2009

Core set
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets 1/
Regulatory tier I capital to risk-weighted assets 1/
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans
Bank provisions to nonperforming loans
Return on assets (after taxes) 2/
Return on equity (after taxes) 2/
Interest margin to gross income 2/
Non-interest expenses to gross income 2/
Liquid assets to total assets 3/
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities 3/
Net open position in foreign exchange to capital 1/ 4/

2010

2011

2012

Mar.

Jun.

Sep.

Dec.

Mar.

Jun.

Sep.

Dec.

11.9
10.9
37.9
7.8
42.0
-0.1
-1.7
75.8
57.4
45.2
56.9
11.6

12.3
11.2
46.9
10.5
46.2
-0.6
-8.8
91.0
62.2
35.2
46.9
11.3

12.3
11.1
51.2
11.5
...
-0.3
-3.9
82.5
54.1
34.5
46.4
12.0

10.6
9.6
66.3
12.8
...
-1.7
-27.3
87.4
56.9
35.2
48.2
15.4

10.1
9.2
78.6
14.7
...
-2.1
-34.2
91.7
58.6
33.2
50.2
14.5

7.0
5.8
...
16.0
62.9
...
...
93.7
66.1
32.3
43.1
...

5.7
4.7
...
18.7
57.1
...
...
100.1
72.0
27.3
34.0
...

8.9
8.1
...
21.6
49.5
...
...
106.5
89.2
29.3
37.5
...

10.2
9.4
...
22.5
50.1
...
...
123.1
106.0
30.8
39.7
...

10.2
9.5
...
24.6
48.1
...
...
103.1
94.0
32.1
41.9
...

5.2

6.4

...

...

...

7.5

7.4

7.3

7.1

7.1

125.7
10.8

96.6
9.0

...
...

...
...

...
...

85.5
7.7

84.2
7.1

80.5
6.7

85.0
6.5

89.6
6.5

60.6

126.0

...

...

...

87.2

177.0

185.0

155.0

193.0

52.1

60.0

...

...

...

61.3

63.8

66.2

64.1

63.7

20.3

21.1

...

...

...

22.8

24.2

25.0

25.5

25.5

440.3
38.3
15.6
11.6

465.5
36.9
15.7
11.4

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

412.7
52.0
14.9
11.5

376.0
47.6
14.3
10.6

383.5
42.6
14.1
10.9

383.3
40.9
15.1
12.1

389.7
39.1
15.4
12.6

248.6
21.9

220.3
18.7

...
...

...
...

...
...

172.4
20.9

163.3
20.1

152.0
16.0

155.0
16.7

164.0
18.1

Encouraged set
Spread between reference lending and deposit rates (end-ofperiod, basis points) 5/
Customer deposits to total (noninterbank) loans 3/
Foreign currency-denominated liabilities to total liabilities 3/
Market liquidity
Average bid-ask spread in the securities market (basis
points)
Households
Household debt to GDP
Real estate markets
Residential real estate loans to total loans 3/
Memorandum items:
Assets (billions of euros)
Banks
Branches of foreign banks
General insurance companies 6/
Other credit institutions
Deposits (billions of euros)
Banks
Branches of foreign banks
Source: Bank of Greece.
1/ Data on a consolidated basis. For end-2011 and 2012Q1, C.A.R. ratios are affected by the PSI and include only the first tranche of €18 billion HFSF
recapitalization. In addittion, C.A.R. ratios are affected by the negative supervisory own funds of two banks (ATEbank and TT Hellenic Post Bank).
2/ From 2004 in accordance with IFRS.
3/ On an aggregate resident-based approach (i.e. commercial banks, cooperative banks, and foreign branches).
4/ Based on revised figures from 2002 onwards.
5/ Spread between rate on credit lines and savings deposit rate.
6/ There are no specialised life insurance companies in Greece. General insurance companies offer general insurance and life insurance products.

44

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

Table 10. Greece: Risk Assessment Matrix 1/
(Scale—High, Medium, or Low)
Source of risk
Relative Likelihood
Impact if Realized
High
High
Reform fatigue
Unemployment is high,
Rejection of program policies
recovery still some distance
could trigger debt default
ahead, and recent fiscal
and/or euro exit.
adjustment reforms have
increased public discontent.
High
High
Delayed or weak recovery of
Debt overhang could be a
Lower growth would
domestic demand
bigger-than-expected drag
undermine achievement of
on investments, and fiscal
fiscal targets, putting at risk
impulse from fiscal measures the conditional debt relief,
is uncertain (fiscal multipliers and leave Greece in a highhigher than assumed).
debt low-growth trap.
Medium
High
Re-emergence of financial
Heightened financial stress
Direct effects via lower
stress in the euro area
from incomplete delivery of
exports, and indirect effects
policy commitments could
via a possibly vicious spiral of
lead to large negative shocks weaker confidence and
to Euro area growth.
renewed capital flight.
Medium
Medium
Delayed pay-off from
It could take longer for wage
Debt sustainability could be
structural reform
adjustments to translate to
called into question, and
lower prices, and for stronger consensus for continued
competitiveness to lead to
reforms eroded.
higher export growth.
Medium
Medium
Protracted period of slow
Ongoing public and private
Adverse impact from lower
European growth
deleveraging in Europe could exports to Europe and
create adverse debt-deflation weaker confidence would be
dynamics.
gradually offset by trade
diversification.
High
Low
Financial crisis in Cyprus
Problems with financial
Adverse effects limited
sector solvency and public
mainly to financial links (from
sector sustainability.
two Cypriot banks branches
in Greece).

1/ The risk assessment matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path discussed in this
report (which is the most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The matrix reflects staff’s subjective
assessment of the sources of risks around this baseline, their relative likelihood, and overall level of concerns
as of the time of the discussions with the authorities.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

45

Appendix I: Debt Sustainability Analysis
1.
This appendix considers the sustainability of Greece’s public and external debt.
Section A provides an overview of the macro, policy and financing inputs. Sections B and C
consider, respectively, public and external debt sustainability, examining the debt trajectory
under the program baseline and under a variety of stress scenarios. The results suggest that the
current program can place Greece on a sustainable trajectory, but the size and duration of
adjustment still required of Greece poses significant risks. Such risks cannot be credibly
eliminated without a more conclusive reduction in Greece’s debt burden.

A. Key Inputs for the DSA
2.
The macro and policy framework underpinning the DSA reflects both the
significant headwinds facing the Greek economy and the limits on currently available
financing.


46

Output Path. The economy is expected to
continue to contract in 2013 before a modest
recovery takes hold in 2014. Tight liquidity, low
confidence, and significant fiscal drag will be
negative for growth in the near term. But
steady implementation of the authorities’
program should help turn around
expectations, improve liquidity conditions, and
lead to a recovery beginning in 2014 and
accelerating to peak at 3¾ percent in 2016. In
the long-term, growth in Greece is projected
to gradually taper off to around 1¾ percent
per annum.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE



Fiscal Adjustment. The program fiscal path targets headline primary adjustment of
1.5 percent of GDP per year, terminating in a surplus of 4.5 percent in 2016. It is further
assumed that Greece can maintain a long-term primary surplus of 4 percent of GDP. This
fiscal path is ambitious, but, in terms of dynamics, almost all of the adjustment will be behind
Greece at the end of this year. Maintaining a 4 percent primary surplus will remain a
challenge: while there were episodes of large sustained primary surpluses in the past, they
were rare and often occurred in extraordinary circumstances (e.g., before the euro accession).



Privatization – Expected proceeds for privatization are EUR 22 billion. This target is at the
low end of international experience. However, the slow progress in recent months point to
risks to achieve even the conservative goals, although mainly concerning the timing of
proceeds rather than the total yield.



Other – The DSA also incorporates key assumptions regarding Greece’s liquidity needs:
i) financing for clearance of arrears is EUR8 billion in the 5 quarters between end Q3-12 and
end-2013; ii) the program targets net deposit accumulation of 1.5 billion by end 2014 before

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

47

returning to the original program path thereafter; and iii) the path for the stock of T-bills
remains elevated at 15 billion for the duration of the program.
3.
The program financing framework reflects the significant relief committed by the
official sector in 2012. At the time of the EFF arrangement in March of 2012, euro area member
countries made an explicit commitment to provide adequate support to Greece during the
program period and beyond, provided that Greece fully complies with the requirements and
objectives of the program. This broad-based show of support was repeated at the Eurogroup in
December 2012 but the euro area member states also made a series of further, more specific
commitments which are now modeled explicitly in the DSA.
 A reduced interest rate on the Greek loan facility from a margin of 150 basis points to 50bps
over Euribor.
 Cancellation of a 10 bps administrative fee on EFSF loans .
 Deferral (and capitalization) of interest payments on EFSF (excluding PSI related loans)
between 2013 and 2022 and on PSI related loans (roughly 34 billion) between 2015 and
2024.
 Transfer of profits on the ECB’s SMP portfolio back to Greece (a projected flow of 9.3 billion
through 2020).
 An additional 4 percent of GDP in debt reduction measures after 2014, conditional on Greece
achieving a primary surplus, to ensure Greece reaches a debt level of 124 percent of GDP in
2020.
Additionally, there is a key commitment that is not modeled in the DSA but remains critical to
the assessment of sustainability in Greece. Euro area member states promised further relief to
ensure Greece reaches a debt level substantially below 110 percent of GDP in 2022, once Greece
reaches an annual primary surplus. Without such relief, the baseline debt projection currently
reaches 113 percent of GDP in 2022 and is in the mid 80s by 2030.
4.
The DSA assumes no market access over the life of the program. Given Greece’s high
debt levels (largely to official sector creditors) and the significant haircut to private sector debt
implemented in March 2012, it is assumed that market access at affordable rates will not be
feasible until late in the decade and even then at modest amounts. Full reliance on market
financing begins after 2020 with initially short maturities of 3 years. For modeling purposes, it is
assumed that the terms of borrowing are directly linked to the level of Greece’s debt. At a debt
level of roughly 115 percent of GDP, Greece is assumed to be able to borrow at a spreads of 450600 bps depending on the maturity with spreads rising by 10 bps for every 1 percentage point
increase in debt.

48

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

B. Public Sector DSA
5.
Baseline projections show that debt would decline to 124 percent of GDP in 2020
and to 113 percent by 2022 (Table A1 and Figure A1). Debt is projected to peak at above
175 percent of GDP in the near term. Steady reductions in the debt ratio begin in 2015, and the
debt ratio is projected to drop below 100 percent of GDP in 2026. The downward revisions at the
time of the first and second review—growth, speed of primary adjustment, and privatization—
resulted in a higher debt path than envisioned at the time of the approval of the EFF
arrangement, when 2020 debt was expected to reach 120 percent of GDP. However, once Greece
reaches an annual primary surplus, the additional relief promised by the European member states
to reduce debt substantially below 110 percent by 2022 will significantly improve debt dynamics.
6.
Despite the high level, the structure of Greece’s debt mitigates risks: near term
financing needs have been substantially reduced via interest deferral on loans from European
member states; maturity extensions by the EFSF have considerably reduced the amount of debt
that matures in the immediate period after 2020 (facilitating the return to market access); and
almost 80 percent of all debt is now to the official sector, substantially reducing rollover risks.

7.
Nonetheless, stress tests suggest that risks to the debt path remain considerable,
particularly from lower primary surpluses and weaker nominal growth (Table A2 and
Figure A2).


Policies. If fiscal adjustment ceased when the primary balance reaches the 1.5 percent of
GDP surplus expected next year, debt to GDP would flatten out just below 130 percent of
GDP. A lower primary balance would put debt on an ever increasing trajectory. The cost of a
lower primary effort for the debt path is greater in the post 2020 period when Greece is
expected to meet its financing needs in the market rather than at concessional official sector
interest rates. Meanwhile, the debt path is less sensitive to lower privatization proceeds.
Indeed, if total receipts are only half of projected levels at 11 billion, debt to GDP in 2020 and
2030 is only 4 percentage points higher in 2020 and it does not widen further over time. This

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

49

reflects the now relatively conservative assumptions that privatization will generate roughly
1 percent of GDP per year.



Nominal Growth. The debt ratio is also
sensitive to lower growth in nominal
output. Beyond the indirect challenge that
weaker growth would have on the primary
effort, a sustained lower rate of growth by
1 percentage point increases public debt in
2020 by 10 percentage points of GDP.



Financing Assumptions. The sensitivity of
the debt path to changes in interest rates
could arise either from a change in the rate
charged by the EFSF or, after 2020, by the
cost of new market borrowing. In practice,
the risks from this channel over the next
decade appear modest as no market access
is assumed and the cost of borrowing from
the EFSF/ESM is a function of the latter’s
own borrowing costs (which is the
weighted cost of borrowing of the Euro
area, largely anchored by low interest
economies).



Joint Shocks. The debt trajectory remains
extremely sensitive to program delays. This
“tailored downside” scenario assumes that
a recovery in confidence and investment is
delayed, structural reforms take longer to implement, and the economy continues to adjust

50

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GREECE

through recessionary channels—resulting in a lower output path than in the baseline. On the
policy side, primary adjustment is assumed to take two years longer to reach the end target,
and privatization delivers €10 billion less than targeted. In this scenario, debt would peak
near 180 percent of GDP but would remain higher for longer, falling to around 147 percent
by 2020, roughly 23 percentage points above the baseline. The underlying point is that, with
debt levels remaining so high in this scenario, even small further shocks could produce
unsustainable dynamics (See Table A2).


Further sensitivity tests. The fan charts below illustrate the impact on the debt-to-GDP ratio
of a large number of shocks to key macroeconomic variables, including (i) real GDP growth;
(ii) the effective real interest rate on government debt; (iii) the variation in the real exchange
rate; and (iv) the primary balance in percent of GDP. Country-specific historical data are used
to generate the sample means and the variance-covariance matrix that define the joint
normal distribution for these variables. By construction, a joint normal distribution of shocks
would generate a broadly symmetrical fan chart, with upside risks matching downside risks
(left panel). To better reflect the likely asymmetry of risks to the Greek debt profile and to
give an indication of sensitivity of the debt path to individual macroeconomic variables, an
asymmetric fan chart is also presented in which positive growth is constrained to be no
greater than 2 percent in any given year.

C. External Sector DSA
8.
External debt is expected to decline gradually (Table A3 and Figure A3). Gross debt,
currently at 233 percent of GDP, would peak at around 245 percent of GDP in 2013 and then
decline to about 155 percent in 2020. Net debt would fall from about 130 percent of GDP in
2012 to around 75 percent in 2020. Several factors lie behind the projected improvement in
external debt. Most importantly, the current account is projected to improve quickly as
competitiveness is restored and Greece continues to rely on official loans at relatively low interest

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

51

rates. The agreed reduction in the GLF interest rate and EFSF fees, and the return of SMP profits
will also contribute to the sharp improvement in the current account. FDI inflows related to
privatization also remain an important non-debt-creating source of financing.
9.

Macroeconomic shocks and policy slippages could result in adverse dynamics.



Larger current account deficits. Slow competitiveness improvements resulting from
delayed structural reforms or a terms-of-trade shock could affect exports negatively and
worsen the baseline current account projections by around 1.5 percent of GDP. The debt
ratio would remain on a downward path, but would be 10 percentage points higher than in
the baseline by 2020.



Interest rate shock. The effects of higher Greek sovereign spreads would be dampened by
the almost exclusive reliance of Greece on official financing. Changes in the risk free rate
would nevertheless impact Greece through the cost of official financing. A 100 bps shock to
Bund rates would worsen the income account and result in a 2020 debt ratio 8 percentage
points above the baseline.



Slippages in privatization. Privatization delays that result in only about half of the projected
privatization proceeds over the projection period would affect external debt dynamics by
reducing non-debt-creating flows. The impact on the debt path would be modest since
baseline privatization related inflows are small relative to the overall financial account
balance. The debt ratio in 2020 would be around 3 percentage points higher than in the
baseline.

10.
Debt dynamics would be significantly worse under a combined shock involving
lagged program implementation, weak competitiveness, and higher interest rates. The
shocks above would likely be individually manageable, but would have a more substantial impact
in an adverse scenario where they occur simultaneously. The net debt ratio would reach about
100 percent of GDP in 2020, 23 percent of GDP higher than in the baseline.

52

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Table A1. Greece: Public Debt Sustainability Framework: Baseline, 2007–30
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2008
Baseline: public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (Includes bank recap, PSI sweetener)
Residual, including debt relief (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio
Gross financing need 6/
Billions of U.S. dollars

2009

2010

Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2020

2025

2030

112.9
0.0

129.7
0.0

148.3
0.0

170.3
0.0

156.9
0.0

175.8
0.0

174.2
0.0

168.2
0.0

159.5
0.0

124.2
0.0

102.2
0.0

86.2
0.0

5.7
5.5
4.8
40.7
45.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1

16.8
16.5
10.5
38.3
48.8
6.2
6.2
2.6
3.6
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.0
0.3

18.6
16.6
4.9
40.6
45.5
11.2
11.2
4.5
6.7
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.6
0.0
2.0

22.0
20.1
2.4
42.4
44.8
16.9
16.9
5.7
11.2
0.0
0.8
-0.5
1.3
0.0
1.9

-13.5
65.3
1.3
44.1
45.4
18.0
18.0
6.3
11.7
0.0
46.0
-0.1
7.1
39.0
-78.7

18.9
17.7
0.0
44.3
44.3
12.9
12.9
5.9
7.0
...
4.8
-1.4
2.3
3.9
1.2

-1.6
0.2
-1.5
43.7
42.2
4.4
4.4
5.4
-1.0
...
-2.6
-1.0
-1.6
0.0
-1.8

-6.0
-7.6
-3.0
42.7
39.7
-0.6
-0.6
4.3
-5.0
...
-4.0
-1.1
-3.0
0.0
1.7

-8.7
-8.0
-4.5
42.0
37.5
-2.6
-2.6
3.4
-6.0
...
-0.9
-1.1
0.2
0.0
-0.7

-8.1
-8.6
-4.3
42.0
37.7
-1.2
-1.2
2.2
-3.3
...
-3.2
-1.8
-1.4
0.0
0.5

-3.4
-3.6
-4.0
42.0
38.0
0.1
0.1
2.0
-1.9
...
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.3

-3.1
-2.9
-4.0
42.0
38.0
0.9
0.9
2.4
-1.6
...
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
-0.2

277.6

338.2

365.2

401.9

355.6

397.0

399.0

393.8

379.9

295.7

243.5

205.3

9.9
34.1

15.6
50.2

19.6
57.9

27.5
79.7

18.9
47.1

21.1
51.4

25.1
60.8

18.6
46.3

11.7
30.2

8.7
26.8

5.4
20.0

4.0
18.2

-0.2
5.0
0.3
4.7
6.3

-3.1
4.5
2.2
2.3
3.9

-4.9
4.4
3.3
1.1
-11.3

-7.1
4.6
3.5
1.0
-8.6

-6.4
2.7
3.5
-0.8
-5.1

-4.2
2.5
3.6
-1.1
-6.5

0.6
2.7
3.1
-0.4
-4.2

2.9
3.0
2.6
0.4
-3.0

3.7
3.2
2.2
1.1
-2.1

2.6
3.5
1.8
1.7
2.6

1.9
4.1
2.1
2.0
1.9

1.8
4.9
2.9
2.0
1.8

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
1.1

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions underlying baseline

1/ General government gross debt. Only intra-government holdings are netted out.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.

53

GREECE

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Real GDP growth (percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, percent)

GREECE

Figure A1. Greece: Public Debt Sustainability: Baseline Bound Tests, 2008–18 1/ 2/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
200
190
180
170

60

Baseline and Historical Scenarios
Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

198
50

Historical

Baseline

30

150
140

141

130

20

120
110
2008
190

2010

2012

2014

0
2018

2016

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

180

176
Growth
shock

170
160

Baseline

150
140

141

130
120
110
2008

2010

190

2012

Baseline:

2.3

Scenario:

0.3

Historical:

0.0

2014

170

157

145

150

141

120
110
2008

180

180

170

170

160

160

150

150

140

140

130

130

2012

110
2008
190

180

180

170

170

2.2
2.9

Historical:

2.4

2014

Primary
balance
shock

190

158
148

141

2010

2012

3.9

Historical:

-3.1

2014

2016

170
160

140
130
120

110
2018

Contingent Liabilities Shock 4/
Contingent
liabilities
shock
150

160

180

150

Baseline

2.1

140

110
2018

No policy
change

Baseline:

160

120

2016

Scenario:

170

130

Primary Balance Shock and
No Policy Change Scenario (Constant primary)

120

190

160

2010

Baseline:
Scenario:

180

150

Baseline

140

190

110
2018

2016

160

Interest
rate shock

160

190

120

Combined Shock 3/
Combined
shock

180

180

130
10

190

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

170
40

160

190

Baseline

190
180
170
160

150

150

140

140

130

130

130

130

120

120

120

120

150

Baseline

140

141

110
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

110
2018

110
2008

150
141

2010

2012

2014

2016

140

110
2018

Sources: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical
average for the variable is also shown.
2/ For historical scenarios, the historical averages are calculated over the ten-year period, and the information is used to
project debt dynamics five years ahead.
3/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
4/ 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2010.

54

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Table A2. Greece: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework: Alternative Scenario, 2007–30
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2008
Baseline: public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (Includes bank recap, PSI sweetener)
Residual, including debt relief (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio
Gross financing need 6/
Billions of U.S. dollars

2009

2010

Projections
2020

2025

2030

112.9
0.0

129.7
0.0

148.3
0.0

2011
170.3
0.0

2012
156.9
0.0

2013
180.5
0.0

2014
182.1
0.0

2015
181.7
0.0

2016
176.4
0.0

2017
169.7
0.0

2018
161.6
0.0

147.2
0.0

126.0
0.0

111.3
0.0

5.7
5.5
4.8
40.7
45.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1

16.8
16.5
10.5
38.3
48.8
6.2
6.2
2.6
3.6
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.0
0.3

18.6
16.6
4.9
40.6
45.5
11.2
11.2
4.5
6.7
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.6
0.0
2.0

22.0
20.1
2.4
42.4
44.8
16.9
16.9
5.7
11.2
0.0
0.8
-0.5
1.3
0.0
1.9

-13.5
65.3
1.3
44.1
45.4
18.0
18.0
6.3
11.7
0.0
46.0
-0.1
7.1
39.0
-78.7

23.7
22.1
0.0
45.5
45.5
17.1
17.1
10.0
7.2
...
5.0
-1.4
2.3
4.0
2.7

1.6
1.7
-1.6
45.7
44.1
6.0
6.0
7.1
-1.1
...
-2.8
-1.1
-1.7
0.0
-0.1

-0.5
-6.3
-2.0
45.5
43.5
0.0
0.0
5.2
-5.2
...
-4.3
-1.1
-3.2
0.0
5.8

-5.3
-7.0
-3.0
45.3
42.3
-3.0
-3.0
3.5
-6.5
...
-1.0
-1.2
0.2
0.0
1.7

-6.7
-9.9
-3.5
45.8
42.3
-2.4
-2.4
3.5
-5.9
...
-4.0
-1.2
-2.8
0.0
3.2

-8.1
-9.8
-4.5
45.9
41.4
-2.1
-2.1
3.3
-5.3
...
-3.3
-1.6
-1.6
0.0
1.7

-6.6
-9.2
-4.3
46.0
41.8
-1.5
-1.5
2.4
-3.9
...
-3.5
-1.9
-1.5
0.0
2.6

-3.2
-3.6
-4.0
45.9
41.9
0.1
0.1
2.5
-2.4
...
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.4

-2.8
-2.6
-4.0
45.9
41.9
1.1
1.1
3.1
-2.0
...
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.0
-0.2

277.6

338.2

365.2

401.9

355.6

396.9

399.0

399.0

389.3

370.9

352.2

320.0

274.4

242.5

9.9
34.1

15.6
50.2

19.6
57.9

27.5
79.7

18.9
47.1

21.7
51.4

26.2
60.8

19.8
46.3

12.6
30.2

12.4
30.8

10.9
27.9

9.6
26.8

5.9
20.0

4.4
18.2

-0.2
5.0
0.3
4.7
6.3

-3.1
4.5
2.2
2.3
3.9

-4.9
4.4
3.3
1.1
-11.3

-7.1
4.6
3.5
1.0
-8.6

-6.4
2.7
3.5
-0.8
-5.1

-4.2
2.5
6.0
-3.5
-4.2

0.6
2.7
3.9
-1.2
-3.4

2.9
3.0
2.9
0.1
0.1

3.7
3.2
2.1
1.2
-0.5

3.5
3.4
2.1
1.2
2.5

3.3
3.5
2.1
1.5
0.9

2.6
3.5
1.7
1.8
2.6

1.9
4.1
2.0
2.1
1.8

1.8
4.9
2.9
2.1
1.7

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
1.4

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions underlying baseline
Real GDP growth (percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, percent)
1/ General government gross debt. Only intra-government holdings are netted out.

55

GREECE

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency denominated debt; and e = nominal
exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.

GREECE

Figure A2. Greece: Public Debt Sustainability: Alternative Scenario,
Bound Tests, 2008–18 1/ 2/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
60

220
Baseline and Historical Scenarios
200

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

180

216

Historical

50

200

180

Baseline
162
Interest
rate shock
157

40
160

Baseline
160

162

30

140

20

120

10

200

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)

140

180

160

140

120

Baseline:

2.2

Scenario:

3.1

120

Historical: 2.3
100
2008
200

2010

2012

2014

0
2018

2016

200

200

Growth
shock

180

180

162

160

160

140

140

120

120

191

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

180

100
2008

Baseline
160

140

120

100
2008

2010

200

2012

Baseline:

2.3

Scenario:

0.3

Historical:

0.0

2014

100
2018

2016

Combined Shock 3/

Combined
shock

180
Baseline
160

178

100
2008

200

200

180

180

160

140

140

140

120

120

120

100
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2012

2014

2016

100
2018

200
Primary Balance Shock and
No Policy Change Scenario (Constant primary)
176 180
169
Baseline
162
No policy
change

2010

2012

Primary
balance
shock

Baseline:

3.7

Scenario:

1.4

Historical:

-3.1

2014

2016

160

140

120

100
2018
200

Contingent Liabilities Shock 4/
171

180

162

160

Baseline
160

162

2010

100
2018

100
2008

Contingent
liabilities
shock

140

120

2010

2012

2014

2016

100
2018

Sources: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes
represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average
for the variable is also shown.
2/ For historical scenarios, the historical averages are calculated over the ten-year period, and the information is used to project
debt dynamics five years ahead.
3/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
4/ 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2010.

56

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Table A3. Greece: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2007–21
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2007

2008

2009

Projections

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2019

2020

Baseline: external debt

70.5

76.8

90.5

134.4

148.3

130.6

135.0

132.0

124.5

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

6.7
6.1
9.8
11.2
21.9
33.1
-2.4
-1.3
2.6
-1.8
-2.0
0.6

6.4
-1.9
9.1
11.5
23.1
34.6
-0.3
-10.7
2.5
-10.0
-3.2
8.2

13.7
9.2
6.0
7.8
18.3
26.2
0.0
3.2
2.5
2.4
-1.7
4.5

43.9
12.6
4.9
6.8
20.5
27.3
1.4
6.3
2.6
4.7
-1.0
31.2

13.9
16.7
3.7
6.0
23.4
29.5
0.3
12.7
3.9
10.2
-1.4
-2.8

-17.7
12.2
-0.6
2.5
25.4
27.9
-1.1
13.9
2.6
10.2
1.1
-29.9

4.4
4.9
-3.8
0.2
27.4
27.6
-1.2
9.9
2.6
5.8
1.5
-0.5

-3.0
-3.4
-4.9
-1.4
28.3
26.9
-1.0
2.5
2.8
-0.8
0.5
0.4

-7.4
-8.2
-5.5
-2.4
28.6
26.2
-1.3
-1.3
3.0
-3.8
-0.6
0.7

321.8

332.6

494.5

655.3

633.2

515.2

492.3

466.2

435.3

402.6 366.8 328.6 293.3 259.9 238.6

93.3
41.9

122.9
52.7

194.4
84.1

216.2
97.3

239.0
114.6

205.6
106.1

178.8
97.5

158.5
86.2

139.2
73.2

119.5 105.7
60.0 50.6

...

...

...

...

...

...

131.1

131.1

131.3

131.6 131.6 131.3 131.3 131.3 132.3

3.0
3.3
4.3
9.6
14.3
-14.6
2.4

17.5
4.7
4.4
10.4
9.6
-14.9
0.3

-3.1
2.3
3.3
-21.5
-25.2
-11.2
0.0

-4.9
1.1
2.8
7.7
0.3
-10.1
-1.4

-7.1
1.0
2.7
7.2
1.4
-9.9
-0.3

-6.4
-0.8
1.6
0.6
-12.1
-3.4
1.1

-4.2
-1.1
1.9
2.4
-6.4
-0.8
1.2

0.6
-0.4
2.1
3.5
-2.3
-0.2
1.0

2.9
0.4
2.4
4.5
0.7
0.1
1.3

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Gross external financing need (billions of euros) 4/
Percent of GDP
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/

115.4 105.9

2018

Debt-stabilizing noninterest current
2021
account 7/

95.8

86.1

77.0

70.7

-9.1
-9.5 -10.1
-10.0 -10.1
-8.7
-5.9
-6.3
-6.5
-3.0
-3.5
-3.9
28.7 28.9 29.1
25.7 25.4 25.2
-1.5
-1.6
-2.0
-2.6
-2.2
-0.3
3.1
3.2
3.0
-4.4
-3.9
-3.3
-1.3
-1.5
-1.5
0.9
0.6
-1.4

-9.6
-8.5
-6.6
-4.3
29.4
25.1
-2.1
0.1
2.8
-2.8
-1.6
-1.1

-9.2
-8.3
-6.4
-4.6
29.6
25.0
-2.3
0.4
2.6
-2.2
-1.5
-0.9

-6.3
-7.0
-6.0
-4.5
29.6
25.2
-2.0
0.9
2.4
-1.5
-1.4
0.7

95.6
43.6

88.1
38.4

78.4
32.7

-5.1

72.1
28.9
-6.7

Key macroeconomic assumptions underlying baseline

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (percent) 6/
Growth of exports (euro terms, percent)
Growth of imports (euro terms, percent)
Current account balance
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

3.7
1.1
2.6
5.1
2.9
0.2
1.5

3.5
1.3
2.9
5.6
3.7
0.5
1.6

3.3
1.4
3.0
5.8
3.9
0.9
2.0

3.0
1.7
3.1
5.6
4.2
1.2
2.1

2.6
1.7
3.1
5.3
4.1
1.4
2.3

2.0
1.9
3.3
4.0
4.6
1.1
2.0

1/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in euro terms, g=real GDP
growth , e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0) and
rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ The external DSA is based on net external debt while the interest rates in the public sector DSA are based on gross debt. Nevertheless, average interest rates generally follow a rising trend, and are more
closely correlated at the end of the projection period, as more new debt is contracted at higher interest rates.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their
levels of the last projection year.

GREECE

57

GREECE

Table A3. Greece: External Debt Sustainability: Baseline Bound Tests, 2007–21
(Net external debt in percent of GDP)
180

Baseline Scenario

160

120
100

Baseline

120

160

Baseline and
Historical Scenarios

140

Gross financing
needs (right scale)

140

160

140

Historical

137

160

140

120

120

80
100

60
71

80
60

40

100

100

Baseline

80

80

20

0
40
2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021
160

Non-interest Current
Account Shock 2/
(Percent of GDP)

140

Noninterest
C/A shock

120

100

Baseline

71
60
2007

160

160

140

140

120

120

100

100

2009

2011

2013

80

2017

2009

2011

2013

160

2015

2017

2019

Bund rate
shock

140

120

100

Baseline

79

80

80
71

60
2021

FDI Shock 4/

160

140

71
60
2007

60
2021

2019

Interest Rate Shock 3/
(Percent)

81

80

2015

60
2007

160

160

140

140

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

60
2021

2019

160

Combined Shock Scenario

140
Combined
shock

120
FDI shock

100

Baseline

80

74

120

120

100

100

80

80

120
93
Baseline

80
71

71
60
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

60
2021

60
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

60
2021

Sources: Greek authorites; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual/preliminary data. Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective
variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year (pre-crisis) historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Current account balance lower by 1.5 percent of GDP due to delayed program implementation and terms-of-trade shock.
3/ Impact of100bps shock to Bund rates on Greece's official interest rates and income balance.
4/ Decline in FDI due to reduced privatization receipts.

58

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

100

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 13/64
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 5, 2013

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2013 Article IV Consultation, Completes
Third Review of the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), and Discusses Ex Post
Evaluation of 2010 Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) with Greece
On May 31, 2013, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
2013 Article IV Consultation with Greece1 and completed the Third Review of the country’s
performance under an economic program supported by an Extended Fund Facility (EFF)
arrangement (see Press Release No. 13/195). The Executive Board also discussed the Ex Post
Evaluation of Exceptional Access Under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement for Greece2.
Background
Since the last Article IV consultation in mid-2009, Greece has been in a deep economic crisis.
This crisis followed from the buildup by 2009 of extraordinary fiscal and external imbalances—
the result of fiscal expansion after euro accession, financed by low-cost external borrowing. The
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.
2

The requirement for ex post evaluations (EPEs) was agreed by the IMF Executive Board in
September 2002 for members using exceptional access in capital account crises, and extended to
any use of exceptional access in February 2003. The aim of an EPE is to determine whether
justifications presented at the outset of the individual program were consistent with IMF policies and
to review performance under the program. To do this, EPEs seek to provide a critical and frank
consideration of two key questions: (i) were the macroeconomic strategy, program design, and
financing appropriate to address the challenges the member faced in line with IMF policy, including
exceptional access policy?; and (ii) did outcomes under the program meet program objectives?

2
re-pricing of risk associated with the global financial crisis, large government deficit and debt
data revisions, and the deterioration in the fiscal balance triggered the crisis in Greece. The
government lost access to capital markets in 2010, and an ambitious multi-year adjustment
program was put in place with the support of the European Commission, European Central
Bank, and IMF. The program aimed to make the fiscal position sustainable through significant
front-loaded consolidation, and to improve competitiveness through comprehensive structural
reforms, while safeguarding the financial system. Unprecedented international support was
provided—first through a 3-year, €110-billion financing package jointly with euro area members
under a Stand-By Arrangement in May 2010, and then through a €173-billion package jointly
with euro area members under the Extended Fund Facility in March 2012 (of which about
€136 billion was financing over and above the undisbursed portion from the first package).
Important progress has been achieved in stabilizing the Greek economy. The cyclically-adjusted
primary balance improved cumulatively by about 15 percent of GDP during 2010–12, and the
headline primary deficit is expected to be eliminated in 2013. Far-reaching labor market reforms
put in place in early 2012 have contributed to wage corrections and a significant reduction of the
competitiveness gap. The external current account deficit improved from about 15 percent of
GDP in 2008 to 3.4 percent in 2012. Financial stability has been preserved, including through a
large recapitalization of the system. Greece remained in the euro area, its key objective, and
associated spillovers that may have had a severe effect on a fragile global economy were
relatively well-contained.
But Greece has adjusted mainly through recession, rather than through productivity-enhancing
reforms. Several adverse and mutually reinforcing factors contributed to worsening investor
sentiment, large deposit outflows, and underperformance of growth in 2011–12; bouts of
political turmoil left doubts about domestic support for the program; structural reforms fell well
short of expectations; and concerns about the external financing strategy, debt sustainability
and Greece’s future in the euro area undermined confidence. These factors amplified the
negative output effect of the front-loaded fiscal consolidation and deepened the recession. As a
result, Greece experienced one of the deepest peacetime recessions to afflict an advanced
economy. Output contracted by 22 percent during 2008–12, unemployment has increased to
about 27 percent, and youth unemployment now exceeds 60 percent.
The underperformance of growth made restructuring of the high level of sovereign debt
inevitable. By involving both private and official creditors in such a restructuring in 2012, the
debt burden was reduced markedly. But public debt still stood at 157 percent of GDP at end2012. Thus, the commitment by Greece’s European partners to provide further conditional relief,
if needed, to bring the projected debt-to-GDP ratio to 124 percent by 2020 and to substantially
below 110 percent of GDP by 2022, is critical for ensuring sustainability.
Greece’s recovery is expected to be gradual. Although fiscal adjustment will remain a drag on
growth, the lion’s share of structural fiscal adjustment is now behind Greece, and steadfast
program implementation can help to turn around expectations, improve liquidity conditions, and

3
lead to a recovery of investment and net exports. On that basis, growth is projected to contract
by 4.2 percent in 2013, but to expand by 0.6 percent in 2014.
Executive Board Assessment
The Executive Directors commended the Greek authorities for the progress thus far in
addressing deep-seated vulnerabilities amidst a sharp and socially painful recession. Fiscal
adjustment has been exceptional by any international comparison, wage adjustment has
facilitated a significant decline in the competitiveness gap, and financial sector stability has
been safeguarded. Directors noted nevertheless that the recovery path remains very difficult, on
the back of still high levels of unemployment, public debt, and non-performing loans. They
urged the authorities to redouble their reform efforts to improve tax and public administration
and enhance productivity, noting that these reforms would promote the efficient allocation of
resources and boost output, facilitate remaining fiscal adjustment, and make the burden of
adjustment more equitable.
Directors noted that Greece is well underway to complete its needed fiscal adjustment. They
underscored that a priority now is to tackle tax evasion by reforming the revenue administration
to improve collection efficiency and enhance its operational independence, and if necessary,
consideration could be given to creating an independent tax agency. Directors encouraged the
authorities to save any gains from better tax collection, continue to broaden the tax base, and
press ahead with public administration reform, particularly the targeted reduction in staff and
replacement of under-performing workers with better qualified staff.
Directors stressed that a critical mass of structural reforms is necessary to raise productivity,
lower consumer prices, boost investment, and create much-needed employment opportunities.
They observed that progress on labor market reforms has increased wage flexibility. Directors
encouraged further steps to facilitate price adjustments commensurate with wage declines
through the liberalization of regulated professions and other product and service markets, and
to improve the business environment more broadly.
Directors welcomed a significant achievement in bank recapitalization and resolution. Noting
that this process will leave the banking system largely under state ownership, they called on the
authorities to reinforce the governance framework in the financial sector and, as soon as
conditions permit, to re-privatize banks that are under state control. Further efforts are needed
to repair balance sheets and restore credit growth, and in this regard, Directors looked forward
to the completion of the reform of the insolvency and non-performing loan resolution
frameworks.
Directors expressed concern that public debt is projected to remain high well into the next
decade and concurred with the assessment that macroeconomic risks are on the downside. In
this context, Directors welcomed the assurances from Greece’s European partners that they will
consider further measures and assistance, if necessary, to reduce debt to substantially below
110 percent of GDP by 2022, conditional on Greece’s full implementation of all commitments

4
contained in the program. Directors also welcomed the continued commitment of Greece’s
European partners to provide adequate support to Greece during the life of the program and
beyond until the country has regained market access, provided that Greece fully complies with
the requirements and objectives of the adjustment program. Most Directors considered that,
should debt sustainability concerns weigh on investor sentiment, even with the framework for
debt relief now in place, and strong program implementation by the Greek authorities
notwithstanding, consideration of a more front-loaded approach to debt relief would be needed.
The macroeconomic and debt outlook must remain under close review.
Directors welcomed the candid assessment of the ex post evaluation of exceptional access
under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement (SBA), and agreed that it provides a good basis for all
parties to draw valuable lessons. Directors emphasized in particular the importance of adequate
financing, strong program ownership, and implementation capacity in the design of programs.
They noted the finding that the SBA-supported program had made overly optimistic
assumptions, including about growth, although some considered that to be the case only with
the benefit of hindsight. Directors saw merit in better risk-sharing arrangements within the euro
area, and noted the benefits of a timely restructuring of sovereign debt with the necessary
safeguards to contain spillover risks and moral hazard. Mindful of the need to ensure equal
treatment across the Fund’s membership, Directors generally saw scope for tailoring the Fund’s
lending policies to the particular circumstances of monetary unions, including appropriate
modalities for collaboration with the union-level institutions.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report(use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2013 Article IV Consultation with Greece is also available.

5

Greece: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009–13
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Prog.
Est.
(Percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
Real GDP
Output gap (percent of pot. output)
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Change in stocks (contribution)
Foreign balance (contribution)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Unemployment rate (percent) 1/
Employment 1/
Unit labor costs
Consumer prices (national definition), period avg.
Consumer prices (HICP), period average
Core prices, period average 2/
GDP deflator
Balance of payments
Current account
Structural current account balance
Trade balance
Export of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Total transfers
Net income receipts
Net international investment position
Public finances (general government)
Total revenues
Total expenditures
Primary expenditures
Overall balance
Primary balance
Cyclically-adjusted primary balance
Gross debt
Interest rates and credit
Lending interest rate (percent)3/
Private credit growth (percent change) 4/
Exchange rates, end-period (percent change) 3/
Nominal effective exchange rate
Real effective exchange rate (CPI-based)
Real effective exchange rate (man. ULC-based)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of euros)
Nominal GDP (percent change)

-3.1
7.3
-5.5
-1.6
4.9
-13.7
-1.2
3.0
-19.4
-20.2
9.4
-1.0
4.2
1.2
1.3
2.3
2.3

-4.9
-7.1
-6.0
-6.4
3.3
-2.6
-7.3
-7.7
-7.0
-8.7
-8.7
-10.4
-6.2
-7.7
-7.7
-9.1
-8.7
-5.2
-6.2
-4.2
-15.0
-19.6
-14.4
-19.2
0.7
-0.4
0.4
0.0
3.0
2.4
3.3
3.7
5.2
0.3
-1.2
-2.4
-6.2
-7.3
-11.5
-13.8
12.5
17.5
24.4
24.2
-2.7
-6.6
-9.2
-8.2
-1.1
-3.9
-8.1
-6.1
4.7
3.3
1.2
1.5
4.7
3.1
...
1.0
2.6
1.1
...
-0.3
1.1
1.0
-0.5
-0.8
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Proj.

-4.2
-10.6
-5.6
-6.9
-4.0
-4.0
0.4
2.6
3.0
-6.4
27.0
-3.7
-6.5
-0.8
...
...
-1.1

-11.2
-7.0
-7.8
18.3
-26.2
0.6
-3.9
-86.4

-10.1
-8.3
-6.8
20.5
-27.3
0.1
-3.5
-98.4

-9.9
-10.9
-6.0
23.4
-29.5
0.3
-4.1
-86.1

-4.2
...
-2.5
25.3
-27.8
0.3
-2.0
-94.2

-3.4
-5.4
-2.5
25.4
-27.9
0.7
-1.6
-114.1

-0.8
-4.9
-0.2
27.4
-27.6
1.8
-2.5
-118.9

38.3
54.0
48.8
-15.6
-10.5
-13.0
130

40.6
51.4
45.5
-10.8
-4.9
-6.1
148

42.4
52.0
44.8
-9.6
-2.4
-1.3
170

43.6
50.3
45.1
-6.7
-1.5
...
158

44.1
50.4
45.4
-6.3
-1.3
2.2
157

44.3
48.4
44.3
-4.1
0.0
5.0
176

5.1
4.2

6.1
0.0

6.8
-3.1

...
-7.2

5.8
-4.0

6.4
-6.5

0.4
1.7
1.1

-3.7
-1.2
0.8

0.0
-0.7
-6.1

...
...
...

-0.5
-1.9
-8.4

0.1
-2.1
-8.4

231
-0.9

222
-3.9

209
-6.1

195
-6.5

194
-7.1

183
-5.3

1/ Based on Labor Force Survey.
2/ Core prices exclude energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco.
3/ Data for 2013 as of March.
4/ Includes securitized or otherwise transferred loans from 2010 onward.

Statement by Thanos Catsambas, Alternate Executive Director for Greece
May 28, 2013
THE THIRD REVIEW OF THE EFF-SUPPORTED PROGRAM
Economic Developments and Prospects. Greece is currently in its sixth year of recession:
GDP declined by 6.4 percent in 2012 for a cumulative contraction of 22 percent between
2008 and 2012; it is forecast to decline further by 4.2 percent in 2013. The unemployment
rate is close to 27 percent and youth unemployment now exceeds 60 percent. Inflation is
anticipated to be steadily lower than the euro area average for both 2013 and 2014. The
current-account deficit has declined from 11.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to 3.4 percent in
2012, and is expected to decline further to 0.8 percent in 2013.
These outcomes are the result of an unprecedented adjustment effort, which began strongly in
2010, continued at a slower pace in 2011, was bolstered with the PSI in early 2012, and was
reinvigorated under the government of Prime Minister Samaras that has been in power since
last June. Thanks to the determined efforts by the authorities, the economic outlook during
the last review remained largely unchanged from the previous review, with continued
prospects for a gradual return to growth in 2014, supported by inflation well below the euro
area average and improved wage flexibility, both of which are helping to restore the
competitiveness of the Greek economy.
Fiscal Policy and Management. Fiscal performance is on track to meet the program targets,
and the government is committed to fully implement all agreed fiscal measures for 2013-14
that are not yet in place; recent legislation extended the collection of the real estate tax
through 2013 via the Public Power Company to ensure an uninterrupted stream of good
revenue performance. A very important step towards enhancing the revenue collection
mechanism, which the authorities recognized as a weak link in the adjustment effort, was a
major reform of the revenue administration to provide it with significantly more autonomy,
powers and resources, and the adoption of more effective and enforceable installment
schemes. The authorities share the staff views that improved tax collections and
minimization of tax evasion and corruption are essential ingredients for a more balanced and
fair distribution of adjustment, which would generally enhance the ownership of the
adjustment program.
The Banking Sector. Most systemic banks completed the basic steps of the recapitalization
process at the end of April; the subscription process is expected to be finalized in the coming
weeks. The recapitalization included the purchase of branches of three Cypriot banks that
had come under distress in recent months by one Greek bank. The funds provided by the
Hellenic Financial Stability Fund should provide adequate capital, even under a significantly
adverse scenario, and will thus ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system and its
deposits. More generally, the authorities have undertaken to develop a comprehensive
strategy for the banking sector following recapitalization by July 15, 2013; the strategy will
address, inter alia, the issue of possible further mergers among the four systemic banks and

2
the timetable for disposing the shares held by the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund to the
private sector.
Structural Reforms. With the macroeconomic adjustment under control, the authorities are
turning their attention to deeper structural reforms, which have been under consideration
since the beginning of the program, and which required rigorous analysis and extensive
consultations with social partners. One important commitment that had lagged behind is well
under way: the administrative reform to improve the quality of the public service and to
strengthen accountability by streamlining its structures, removing positions, and reallocating
staff. This major reform includes dismissals that are targeted at disciplinary cases and cases
of demonstrated incapacity, absenteeism, and poor performance, or that result from closure
or mergers of government entities. Other areas of continued structural reforms are (a)
continued liberalization of product and service markets, including transport and retail trade,
private education, fuel distribution; and (b) electricity sector reforms to ensure financial
sustainability and promote competition and efficiency.
Safety Net. The government is committed to protect the most vulnerable segments of the
population during these turbulent times. The government is making progress in strengthening
the social safety net, including through targeted employment and training programs
supported by the EU, pilot programs to extend unemployment benefits and provide minimum
income support, a program to provide access to primary health care for the uninsured, and a
scheme to reduce the financial burden on indebted low-income households which have been
severely affected by the crisis.
In sum, this review succeeded in shifting the focus from further macroeconomic adjustment
through recessionary channels to the prospect of viable growth through extensive structural
reforms, which will help achieve an annual primary surplus at an early time. When this is
realized, the authorities look forward to earlier commitments by Euro Area Member States to
consider further initiatives and assistance, if necessary, for achieving an additional and
credible reduction of the Greek debt-to-GDP ratio, which should help ensure the long-term
sustainability of Greece’s public debt.
THE 2013 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION
Areas of Agreement. My authorities are grateful to the staff for the comprehensive and
rigorous Article IV consultation report. They consider it a useful and important supplement
to the program discussions. They also appreciate the analytical chapters in the Selected Issues
paper, which they consider important contributions to the debate about the development
model of Greece “the day after”.
My authorities agree with most conclusions in the staff appraisal, and appreciate the
emphasis on three major achievements accomplished by Greece: exceptional fiscal
adjustment in a short period of time, fundamental changes in the labor market, and
preservation of banking sector stability. Combined, progress in these areas has improved
Greece’s competitiveness and has contained the runaway increase in public debt. With the
help of the Fund and its European partners, Greece has begun the process of (re)gaining

3
sustainability within the Euro zone and is now looking forward to reaching a sustainable
growth path based on an economically viable model.
Some Amplification to Staff Conclusions. While the authorities agree with the thrust of the
staff remarks and recognize that major challenges remain ahead, they wish to qualify some of
the conclusions that are presented in the staff analysis regarding structural reforms.
First, as a matter of general principle, structural reforms are more difficult to implement than
macroeconomic adjustment measures, not only because of political considerations but also
due to severe capacity constraints. The latter, which should not be underestimated during the
early phases of the program, are gradually being overcome thanks to massive technical
assistance from Fund staff, the European Task Force, and several bilateral donors. As a
result, progress under the coalition government that came to power one year ago has been
steadfast: the Spring 2013 Update of the Euro Plus Monitor, produced by Berenberg Bank
and the Lisbon Council, placed Greece on the top spot of its Adjustment Progress Indicator.
In addition, Greece has been ranked as the country with the highest responsiveness to OECD
recommendations between 2010-12.
Second, the authorities would qualify the characterization that “limited progress has been
made in tackling Greece’s notorious tax evasion” as follows: while tax compliance and
collections remain a formidable challenge, in the past six months there are weekly reports
about individuals who have been arrested for major tax evasion offenses. More generally, tax
compliance is expected to be strengthened considerably with the January appointment of an
independent General Secretary of public revenues, who, as noted earlier, was vested with
more autonomy, power and resources to carry out effectively the tax collection process.
However, resolution of tax offenses lies with the tax courts, which are beyond the reach of
the executive branch, and the government has identified this as an area for further
improvement. As staff acknowledges in the Article IV report (para. 33), the authorities,
while mindful of the huge task of reforming tax administration within a short time horizon,
have “emphasized their political commitment to see the process through”.
Third, the authorities recognize the considerable delays in the implementation of employment
reforms in the public sector. However, with the April 29 passage of the Omnibus Law,
which included quarterly plans for 4,000 mandatory exits in 2013 and 15,000 cumulative
through end-2014, the taboo against dismissals in the public sector has in principle been
lifted, and the door has been opened for mandatory redundancies. The government sees this
new avenue as a long-overdue opportunity to revamp the quality of public services through
the replacing of laid-off public servants with qualified staff in key areas such as bank
supervision and tax administration.
Doing Business, Privatizations, and the Banking Sector. Beyond tax administration and
public sector reforms, the government intends to focus on invigorating Greece’s export and
import competing industries. The government is committed to reduce barriers to entry into
various markets, including opaque and lengthy licensing procedures, and, more generally, to
improve the business environment. The World Bank Group Doing Business Report has
raised the rank of Greece to 78 in 2013 from 89 in 2012.

4

The privatization process has picked up. The Hellenic Republic Asset Development Fund
recently approved the sale of a 33 percent stake in the Football Betting Organization to a
private concern for over €700 million. Other privatizations recently completed are State
Lotteries (€190 million), Mobile Telephony Licenses (€381 million) and the International
Broadcasting center (€81 million). There are also 14 privatizations in the final stages of
completion, including the National Gas Utility Corporation, for which established foreign
companies have tendered bids. In sum, since the beginning of the program the authorities
expect cumulatively €4.2 billion privatization receipts by end-2013, €6.5 billion by end2014, €7.7 billion by end-2015 and €11.1 billion by end-2016.
The authorities recognize the importance of effective financial intermediation in achieving a
strong recovery and a viable growth path. The large injection of public capital to the systemic
banks is understood as a temporary measure and the government intends to implement reprivatization at the earliest possible stage. More generally, the authorities are working on a
reinforced governance framework, supporting strong oversight and supervision, which would
also eliminate undue Government interference and attendant problems of directed credit.
Moreover, a key priority for the banking system will be to contain and reverse the mounting
tide of non-performing loans. The authorities are committed to put in place a framework for
dealing with distressed household borrowers. In addition, deposits are replenished through
cash that had been removed from the banking system: Greek private-sector bank deposits are
9 percent up from last June's lows and stabilized in May after some outflows in April on
Cyprus fears.
Green shoots. While in several areas the picture is mixed, the government believes that 2013
will be the last year of retrenchment and the recession will bottom out in the next few
months. Several recent developments point to hopeful signs for economic recovery. First, the
real economy is set to acquire much needed liquidity: the government has paid off €2.2
billion of an outstanding €9 billion in arrears to suppliers and the stock of T-bills held by the
banking sector declined, thus releasing resources for the financing of private sector activities.
Second, work on some major infrastructure projects is restarting, potentially creating
thousands of jobs. Third, tourist spending during the upcoming summer season may rise, as
the Association of Greek Tourism Enterprises are anticipating 17 million tourist arrivals in
2013, one million more than in 2012. Fourth, two weeks ago the rating company FITCH
upgraded both the sovereign rating and the rating of Greece’s four systemic banks by one
notch (with a stable outlook), stating that “ clear progress has been made towards eliminating
the twin fiscal and current account deficits and that ‘internal devaluation’ has at last begun to
take hold”.
Growth and the Role of Confidence. The authorities fully share the staff’s view that
restoring growth remains the overarching precondition for the success of the three-year old
adjustment effort. In turn, growth cannot be achieved without improvement in sentiment.
The authorities’ top priority is to continue to enhance confidence in the government’s resolve
to forge ahead with the required reforms, so as to secure broad political stability and thus
elicit domestic and foreign investments. The April 29 Omnibus Law mentioned earlier is a
testimonial to the support that the government now enjoys among large strata of the

5
population. The passage of the bill in parliament, despite its far reaching implications for
civil servants, has been received only with muted protests, and certainly without vocal street
confrontations.
Confidence is rising. The latest euro-zone Economic Sentiment Indicator for Greece rose to
89.2, above the euro-zone average, and the Purchase Managers’ Index showed considerable
improvement in April (45, up from 42.1 in March), which was the highest level since July
2011. Such improvement in sentiment, coupled with the European partners’ commitment to
deal effectively with Greece’s debt overhang, is the best assurance to dispel Euro exit fears
and set the stage for a new page in the country’s growth path.
THE EX-POST EVALUATION (EPE) OF THE 2010 STAND-BY ARRANGEMENT
The authorities have found the analysis in the paper insightful and balanced; essentially,
following initial resistance by European partners, who had considered the Greece problem an
“internal affair” of the Euro zone, the SBA was put together in a very short period of time,
without adequate political dialogue and, more importantly, with insufficient contributions by
the authorities to tailor conditionality to the peculiarities of the economy and the Greek
public administration. Moreover, an ex-ante (or, at least, early) debt restructuring that would
have helped mitigate the depth of adjustment and the severity of the recession, was ruled out
by Greece in agreement with Euro zone partners. In a nutshell, as the EPE report aptly
remarks, the SBA-supported program turned out to be a holding operation until the PSI
became inevitable and an EFF-supported program replaced the original arrangement.
The authorities’ official and detailed comments appear in Appendix I. They found the
concluding section “Possible Lessons” reasonable and constructive, and would like to
emphasize the following two areas for future consideration by staff and management:


Although fiscal adjustment was necessary and structural reforms were essential,
especially in the absence of monetary and exchange rate policies, the detailed
conditionality in many program areas was at times overwhelming. Going forward, it
would be helpful always to ensure that prior actions, not only in fiscal policy and
management but in all areas with structural conditionality, are macro-critical for the
achievement of the program objectives. At the same time, the authorities
acknowledge that the TA provided by Fund staff, especially in fiscal management,
has been tailored to the needs of a system that required hands-on assistance and has
been important to help them improve much needed capacity for implementation; they
hope to continue the strong TA engagement with the Fund.



Relations with Troika members have generally been smooth, and the authorities
acknowledge both the synergies in areas of shared expertise and the respective
comparative advantage in structural issues. Based on these considerations, the
authorities fully endorse the recommendation for streamlining procedures and
documents among the Fund staff and EC and ECB officials.

