December 2016

LIST OF IMF MEMBER COUNTRIES WITH DELAYS IN
COMPLETION OF ARTICLE IV CONSULTATIONS OR
MANDATORY FINANCIAL STABILITY ASSESSMENTS
OVER 18 MONTHS
IMF staff regularly produces papers proposing new IMF policies, exploring options for
reform, or reviewing existing IMF policies and operations. The Report prepared by IMF
staff and completed on December 22 has been released.
The staff report was issued to the Executive Board for information. The report was
prepared by IMF staff. The views expressed in this paper are those of the IMF staff and
do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF's Executive Board.

The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information
and premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports
and other documents.
Electronic copies of IMF Policy Papers
are available to the public from
http://www.imf.org/external/pp/ppindex.aspx

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

© 2016 International Monetary Fund

December 22, 2016

LIST OF IMF MEMBER COUNTRIES WITH DELAYS IN
COMPLETION OF ARTICLE IV CONSULTATIONS OR
MANDATORY FINANCIAL STABILITY ASSESSMENTS OVER
18 MONTHS
Approved By
Siddharth Tiwari

Prepared by Strategy, Policy, and Review Department in
consultation with the Communications, Legal, Secretary’s
and Area Departments.

In accordance with Executive Board Decision No. 15106-(12/21), the Fund will publish
on its external website a list of member countries whose Article IV consultations or
mandatory financial stability assessments have been delayed by more than 18 months,
as of the date of publication, since the expected deadline for conclusion.
The latest version of this list, as shown in Appendix I, will be published on the Fund’s
external website on or after December 28, 2016.

LIST OF IMF MEMBER COUNTRIES WITH DELAYED ARTICLE IVS

Appendix I. List of IMF Member Countries with Delays in
Completion of Article IV Consultations or Mandatory Financial
Stability Assessments over 18 Months
In line with a framework introduced in 2012 for addressing excessive delays in the completion of
Article IV consultations, the following table lists the IMF members for which the Article IV
consultation has been delayed by more than 18 months at end-November, 2016. The delay is
counted past the stipulated date for the consultation plus any applicable grace period. There are no
countries for which the mandatory financial stability assessments are delayed by more than 18
months at end-November, 2016.
IMF Member Countries with Delays in Completion of Article IV Consultations over 18 Months 1/

Delay in

Completion

Stipulated Date for

Date of Last
Consultation

Completion of Next

Venezuela
Eritrea
Syrian Arab Rep.

9/13/2004
12/7/2009
2/26/2010

9/13/2005
12/7/2010
2/26/2011

No agreement on mission dates/modalities
No agreement on mission dates/modalities
Political/security situation

132
69
66

Libya

5/17/2013

5/17/2014

Political/security situation

27

Member

Greece

5/31/2013

Consultation

2/28/2015

Main Reason for Delay

3/

2/

Completion of
Consultation (in
months)

Program-related issues

5/

4/

21

Source: IMF staff.
1/ The status and classification of countries are as of November 30, 2016.
2/ Excluding three-month grace period, where applicable, for member countries without a Fund arrangement or PSI.
3/ Reasons for delay are explained below.
4/ The delay measures the lag between the stipulated date of completion of the next Article IV consultation plus the threemonth grace period, where applicable. If the stipulated date for completion of the consultation falls in the first half of a given
month, the calculation of the delay includes this month.
5/ Ongoing negotiations on a successor program; and Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2012 Extended
Fund Facility Arrangement. Staff conducted discussions for the 2016 Article IV consultation with Greece during September
19-23, 2016, and the consultation is expected to be completed by the Board in the coming weeks.

Note: Taxonomy of the Reasons for Delays of Article IV Consultations
Article IV consultations are delayed for a variety of reasons. For the purpose of monitoring delays, Fund
staff groups the reasons into the following categories. It should be recognized, however, that a delay
may have more than one reason.


2

Program-related issues: Delayed (i) in order to combine the consultation with a request for use of
Fund resources (UFR) or Policy Support Instrument (PSI), or program review; or (ii) due to
ongoing discussions on UFR or PSI, or continued work on program review.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

LIST OF IMF MEMBERS WITH DELAYED ARTICLE IVS



Further discussions: Delayed due to further discussions with the authorities on economic
developments and policies.



Political/security situation: Delayed due to the unsettled political and/or security situation.



Government change: Delayed due to forthcoming or recent elections, change of government, or
changes within government.



Staffing constraints.



Authorities’ request: Delayed at the request of the authorities due to, for example, their inability
to host the mission as a result of their work schedule.



No agreement on mission dates/modalities: There was no agreement on the modalities for the
mission/the authorities have not communicated dates for the Article IV consultation mission.



Miscellaneous: Includes reasons not accommodated above.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

